 italian Paolo Nespoli, 54, has spent 174 days in space across two missions, travelling into earth orbit on both NASA's space shuttle and teh russian Soyuz spacecraft. We asked what it's like to live in space, how it felt to witness the space shuttle docked to the ISS and more in our exclusive interview. 

How it works: Why did you decide to become an astronaut?

paolo nespoli: Ever since I was a little boy I wanted to become an astronaut. i was inspired by the Apollo missions, though not really Apollo 11. I was more interested in the later missions where they drove the rovers on the moon. I thought it was fascinating, with the astronauts jumping and driving around on the surface. Life was kind of different after that. I was drafted into the italian army (they still had the draft back then) then figured out that I could make it as an astronaut. I applied twice to the European Space Agency (ESA) and didn't make it, but on the third selection I made the cut. 

HIW: your firs mission to space was on board STS-120. What was it like going to space for the first time? 

PN: I was selected fairly young and got to fly after just nine years of training, which is somewhat of a short time to wait compared to many. People asjed if I was scared but I wasn't really. I'd trained so much, I knew what to expect. Feeling the acceleration in the space shuttle was amazing. the first couple of minutes it really shakes you. However, I was scared in space, because we'd trained for years and only had 15 days to complete our mission. all Ikept thinking to myself was, you better not mess this up. people have been working on this for years !. The fear of failure was the scariest thing about going into space. 

HIW: What was the hardest part of going to space? 

PN: I didn't mid it so much in space but my body felt really old when I came back to earth; the gravity was so intense =. I was fine in space but i'm not exceptional or a superhero. Of the seven shuttle crew members and three on the soyuz I was the worst coming back by far. The micro-gravity environment does a lot to your body. you lose a lot of calcium in space, your bones and muscles can get wuite weak. 

How did you ensure your body stayed in shape =? ho did you adapt to life in space? 

We'd do about two hours of physical fitness everyday. i would say you come back in better shape (in terms of fittness) doing two hours of excercise every day for six months, I came back with more musces and less fat than I left. 
We did aout one hour of cardiovascular excercise on a tredmill and another hour of resistance excercise. Obviously, you can't lift weights in space, so a machine simulates the strain of lifting as on earth. 

There's no training to prepare your body for its loss of balance. you get nausea and all sorts of things. your skeleton also stretches (I was five or six centimeters taller than on earth), and so mecles keep their strength but they are of a different length. your body's ewuilibrium shifts and when you come back to earth the muscles start contracting again but they cannot find the equilibrium point so easily. I remember shaking constantly. Also I could be sitting and feel totally tired. Coming back to earth is definitely the hardest aspect of being in space for me anyway!

On the station, you are isolated and confined, with only few other people to talk t. you can't just go out in the evening and see people. For some reason I discovered that whatever I was doing I was seeing pizzas all over the place, such as in clouds when lookin at earth. Freud would probably have a lot to say about that! I thought the food on the station was decent but far away from way from what an italian would say is delicious. It was very good from a nutritional point of vies but little horrific for an italian. maybe I was craving pizza because of food like that or maybe I was just associating pizza with going out with friends and having beer maybe that is what I was missing. You are in isolation up there, and ther are a lot of things you can't do, a lot of things which aren't normal. 

sometimes you forget that you're in space. It takes about a month and a half before you get out of your earth habits getting used to space doing things in a different way. For example we had a table in one of the nodes for eating in the evening. tha table had been there for years. It was horizontal in respect to the floor of the deck because tha's how a table is on earth. It was proruding a lot and you'd often hit it when going pat. one day I was looking at it and I thought there must be a way to do this better. Why is this table parallel to the deck, when there's no gravity. you use velcro to stick things to the table anyway so that they don't float away so why not have it at an angle llike a technical drawing table? i kind of tilted it up a little bit the more and more until finally if you loog at it now it's tilted at a steep angle because you don't need a horizontal table and it's much more out of the way. It was ther for ten years before somebody thought to move it!

I would say that it is an environment that is closed, isolated and confined. At first whe I was told i would spend six months on the station defore the mission I thought oh my god six months are you out of your mind? looking back I realixed that I did not have the time to do everything I wanted like taking more pictures looking at earth playing around more calling people doing video clilps. You end up doing things up there that make sense time flies and everything is nice but you wish you could have done more. 

HIW: what was your favorite aspect of living in space? 

PN I loved taking pictures looking at the earth and [re]discovering it. It was very enjoyable. You just go to the window and there you have it a great and gorgeous view. however when you go to the windom random;y more often than not you're just going to see an ocean with clouds. it's nice and blue but that's about it. sometimes you see a piece of land going by and it's not so recognizable. it's not easy to figure out what's what except italy! when you start talking about the UK and Ireland it gets complicated because of the angle cloud coverage time of the day and sun reflection etc. In the beginning you try to figure out where you are without using the software that tells us but little by little you start to know what's going on. By the second/third/forth months you look out the window and you know where you are the continent information features that are there that you might want to take pictures of or if it's boring you might spend few inutes on something else. 

I started using more and more powerful lenses to capture some interesting details that I could see from up there. First i used to see the egyptian pyramids the great wall of china and other landmarks. I wanted to see an aircraft carrier at sea, some volcanos, special islands and then i started looking around randomly taking pictures of things that were astonishing and different. I had this feeling that I was a scientist peering down a microscope that allowed me to take pictures of this small sphere rotating below discovering miscroscopic things. I'd look at the pictures and realize that those things were 20 kilometers in diameter. You can't really see things that are any smaller than that. I became really interested in taking photos of land marks and countries. I started using social media like twitter and flicker because I thought those things were interesting. i decided to start tweeting them to see what people thought. that turned out to ne a pretty good source of enjoyment: finding something special and tweeting it to people asking them for quizzes or riddles from space and seeing all the comments. It turned out to be a very enjoyable way to spend time letting everybody participate in this adventure. 
 sometimes 
whre oyou asked to take the picture by nasa or esa?
I wasn't asked to do it by NASA or the EAA some of the other astronauts have done ir before and I was not the first. several of them told me that it was enjoyable I did not tweet before I went into space because I don't have much time to so it 



But in space you hano time to research so phones all day thyping what you are doing. clicming clicking clicking but I have so many things to do  however in space it worked out pretthhy well sometimes when I was taking pictures I was asking for help from ESA to identify what I was looking at other times I would guess but sometimes I would make mistakes and peoplke would correct me so I learend thawant to take a picture ther eis amoment in which then you understand how precise you need to be I'm always on space time now when i'm at home in teh evt it was better to verify what I was seeing before half of the world thinks what is that stupid astronaut doing up there. one of the first weeks I was up I tweeted a picture of a european city and really thought it was london turns out it was pari how can you make a mistake between paris and london? it was beyond me but in space you travel so fast that you pass by so quickly and yu only have a few seconds to snap a pictue you have no time to research so mistakes do happen. 

did it feel like you were traveling 17000 mph? 

well it depends on if you are above the ocean for i remember when we look like were going very fast but iof you when i'm at home in the evening and I look outside and see a sunset or moon I see a nice picture and and think up in the moon and you like it ok I'm going to get my camera and and I'll take a picture in 30 minutes in space if you see that if you see the moon and you like it you better take it in the next t10 seconds because it's gone.

oyou don't feel on the ISS or the sayouz capsule though I remeber when we detached form the station on soyuz coming back to earth there is a moment in which the engine fires and you slow down and go to the atmosphere and the capsule breaks up into three pieces you are middle the only one that gets to earth the others burn up in the atmosphere at this pint you are tumbling finishing with  break burn the capsule has seperated and you are waiting to be captured by the atmosphere the you look outside and realize you're tumbling it's not a nice feeling are we suppose to be tumbling you think if you don't loook outside yu don;t feel it even at mach 25 

what were your main roles on the Iss ? 

I was one of the flight engineers for the space station we do a lot of things up there the main purpose is to take advantage ofthey do all  the icro gravitay environmetn and the position of the ISS for all sort of experiments most of them you cannpot do on ground because of gravity . i would say 30-40 percent of the the time I was passed carrying scientific experimetns in many fields i did some in life sciences for example how my brain adapts to the micro gravity environment and all sorts of tests on computers and other stuff. the reason for the work on my brain was because when you go into space you actually enter a new environment and the brain has to adapt to the new situation. It's very similar to someone on earth hwho has an accident and loses a part of the brain or a lomb and need to re learn to do all these things 


in space suddenly there is no more gravity and you can't wjust walk you have to push yourself you have to do things in a new wayyou have to invent a way to do it by looking at how the brain adapts doing this enables scientists to figure out techniques and therapies that can be useful on the ground for example I was a guinea pig for osteoporosis. They gave me a special diet for weeks one week at a time they were changing my diet from having a lot of proteins and ones lots of vegetables proteins and anothe one i tried was having lots of potassium whic is tought t interefere with the oste tbeyy do all these things the look at you and checl your body parameters figuring out if there are any relatively simple solutions like does food affect how perople lose bone mass? 

about 50 percent of my time was spent aitaining the station it;s amazing how work intensive tit is to maintain a laboratory like this you have supply ships arriving every month it's like you lived in your haouase and never left but once a month a truck would come to your hfront door and dock there. everything you'd need for that month would be in the truck the air you breathe the water you drinkall the suplies  all the equipments all the space parts piece of tubes for plumbing electricity a new TV new computer new telephone I really mean everything and then you have to take everything from this truck and put somewhere you can find it again you cannot justpile it up in space because it floats away. After it's unpacked you take all your waste everything you don't need and shove it in the supply vehicle so that it gets thrown out and burns uo in the atmosphere. that's alot of work apart from the supply ship you need to cook clean filters and put together facilities so that you can carry out experiments. A lot of things go into the basic running of the space station

the last ten percent or so of my time was for physical fittness and educational or PR activities, such as talking to schools on the phone. My expedition actually had the record for schools contact - 77 - which meant thousands of kids were talking to us; you do a little video clip for this and that or you do an interview; let's call it outreach activities the you have eight hours of sleep and after that are ane and a half hours of post sleep. In pre-sleep  you take care of yourself do recreational things clean up eat this kind of thing. In the morning your're supposed to have breakfast a shower the usual things. What i would usually do would be to compress activities I would not sleep eight hours instead I'd sleep six  which left me with three or four hours freein the evening. then I could take more pictures eat sort out my photos put them up on twitter and flicker or call some friends. on the space station we have a phone and often write emails. 
can you call whenever you want? 

you can pretty much call when you want. It's a special phone though looks simila to that you'd find on any desk. It works through a satelllite system and since you are rotating pretty fast you tend to lose the connection quickly and sometimes there are holes for 10-20 minutes. You can;t use the phones continually. In general if I want to call somebody that evening one way or another i manage to call them. In the evenings I mostly talked to my wife and daughter. 

how do you shave on the ISS? 

this is one of the things you need to learn to do differently. obviously you cannot always take a shower and ther's not much water and it gets all ovet the place. shaving you need to learn to do things ina  whole new way. First I put a bit of water on my face the take a pea size amount of shaving cream and just make it stick there on my face. Next I take a freash new razor blade and get shaving. there's no way you can actually clean the razor plade so you just try to make it work for the whole face and then throw it away. there's nothing else you can do. then you use a wet towel to rinse your face and that's it. 

how do you staty clean on ISS? 

the space station is now in its complete assembly stage. All the planned modules are up there. for years they camped on the station but now we have what they call crew quarters. there are telehone booth sized spaces that have your sleeping bag computer personal stuff on the wall and changes of clothes etc. You can close the door and it's pretty private and dark. You turn the lights off and you're isolated and insulated; you can't hear people outside. for a personal space it's quite convenient. You try to use it on the ground though and oh my god you never think you'll be able to sleep there because it;s vertical and narrow. in zero gravity though it becomes very omfortable . We do have a facility which technically is called the waste hygiene compartment. It's another thelephoe booth sozed place that can be closed. Inside there is your toilet and you can take your clothes off and wash it a bit more comfort. we usally do wash ourselves in a piecemeal fashion here and there or just use a towel. if you want to take a shower you go into this booth. We like to use thi s russian towel which is very thin and impregnated with soapy disinfectant liquid and you wrap this towel over your body. It's pretty nice and you feel pretty clean whe you do this. For washong your hair wrap it through and then dty up with a towel and then that's it. 



