An interview with an astronaut 

BY HOW IT WORKS TEAM 07/02/2012
HTTPS://WWW.HOWITWORKSDAILY.COM/AN-INTERVIEW-WITH-AN-ASTRONAUT/

Italian Paolo Nespoli, 54 has spent 174 days in space across two missions, travelling into Earth orbit on both NASA's Space Shuttle and the Russian Soyuz spacecraft. We asked what it's like to live in space, how it felt to witness the Space Shuttle dockrd to thr ISS and more in our exclusive interview.


How It Works: Why did you decide to become an astronaut?

Paolo Nespoli: Ever since I was a little boy I wanted to become an astronaut. I was inspired by the Apollo missions, though not really the Apollo 11. I was more interested in the later missions where they drove the rovers on the moon. I thought it was fascinating, with the astronauts jumping and driving around the surface. Life was kind of different after that. I was drafted into the Italian army (they still had the draft back then) then figured out that I could make iit as as astronaut. I applied twice to the Europen Space Agency (ESA) and didn't make it, but on the third selection I made the cut.

HIW: Your first mission to space was on board STS-120. What was it like going to space for the first time?

PN: I was selected fairly young and got to fly after just nine years of training, which is somewhat of a short time to wait compared to many. People asked if I was scared but I wasn't really. I'd trained so mucg, I knew what to expect. Feeling the accelration in Space Shuttle  was amazing. The first couple of minutes it really shakes you. However, I was scared in space, because we'd trained for years and we only had 15 days to complete our mission. All I kept thinking to myself was, "You better not mess this up. People have been working on this for years!' The fear of failure wa sthe scariest thing about going into space.


HIW: What was the hardest part of going to space?

PN: I didn't mind it so much in space, but my body felt really old when I came back to Earth; the gravity was so intense. I was fine in space, but I'm not exceptional or a superhero. Of the seven Shuttle crew members and three on the Soyuz I was the worst coming back by far. The microgravity environment does a lot to your body. You lose a lot of calcium in space; your bones and muscles can get quite weak.

HIW: How did your ensure your body stayed in shape? How did you adapt to life in space?

PN: We'd do abouut two hours of physical fitness every day. I would say you come back in better shape [in terms of fitness]. Doing two houus of excercise everday for six months, I came back with more muscles and less fat than when I left. 
We did about one hour of cardiovascular exercise on a treadmill and another hour of resistance exercise. Obviously, you can't lift weights in space, so a machine simulates the strain of lifting as on Earth.

There's no training to prepare your body for its loss of balance. You get nausea and alll sorts of things. Your skeleton also stretches (I was five centimeters taller than on  Earth), and so muscles keep their strength but they are of a different length. Your body's equilibrium shifts, and shen you come back to Earth the start contracting again, but they cannot find equilibirum point so easily. I remember shaking constantly. Also I could be sitting and feel tottally tired. Coming back to Earth is definitely the hardest aspect of being in space -- for me, anyway!

On the station, you are isolated and confined, with only a few other people to talk to. You can't just go out in the evening and see people. For some reason I discovred that whatever I was doing I was seeing pizzas all over the place, such as in clouds when looking at Earth. Freud would probably have a lot to say about that! I thought the food on the station was decent but far away from what an Italian would say is delicious. It was good from a 
nutritional point of view, but a little horrific for an Italian. Maybe I was craving pizza because of food like that, or maybe just associating pizza with going out with friends and having a beer, maybe that is what I was missing. You are in solation up there, and there are a lot of things you can't do, a lot of things which aren't normal.

Sometimes you forget that you're in sppace. It takes about a month and a half before you get out of your 'Earth habits', getting used to space, doing things in a different way. For example, we had a table of nodes for eating in the evening. The table had beenthere for years. It was horizontal in respect to the floor of the deck, because that's how a table is on Erath. It was protruding a lot, and you'd often hit it when going past. One day I was looking at it and thought, 'There must be a way to do this better. Why is the table parallel to the deck, when there's no gravity?' You use Velcro to stick things to the table anyway so that don't flot away, so why not have it at an angles, linke a technical drawing tabe? I kind of tilted it up a little bit, then more, and more until finally, if you look at it now, it's tilted at a steep angle bacuse you do not need a horizontal table and it's much more out of the way. It was there for ten years before somebody thought to move it!

I would say that it is an environment that is closed, isolated and confined. At first, when I was told I would spend six months on the station before the mission, I thought, 'Oh my God, sixx months, are you out of your mind?' Looking bakc I realized that I did not have the tiem to do everything I wanted, like taking pictures, looking at Earth, playing around more, calling people, doing video clips. You end up doing things up there that make sense, time flies and everything is nice, but you wish you coukd have done more.


HW: What was your favorite aspect of living in space?

I loved taking pictures, lo9oking at the Earth and [re]discovering it. It was very enjoyable. You just go to the window and there you have it - a great and gorgeous view. However, when you go to the window randomly, more often than not you're just going to see an ocean with clouds. It's nice and blue, but that's about it. Sometimes you see a piece of land going by and it's not recognizable.. It's not easy to figure out what's what, except Italy! When you start talking about the UK and Ireland it gets complicated because of the angle, cloud coverage, time of the day and sun reflection, etc. In the beginning you try to figure out where you are without using the softwar ethat tells us, but little by little you start to know where you are - the secon/third/fourth months you look out the window and you know where you are - the continet, information features that are there that you might want to take pictures of, or if it's boring you might spend a few minutes on something else.

I started using more and more powerful lenses to capture some interesting details that I could see from up there. First I tried to see the Egyptian pyramids, the Great Wall of China, and oher landmarks. I wanted to see an aircraft carrier at sea, some volcanoes, special islands, and then I started looking around randomly, taking pcitures of things that were astonishing and different. I had this feeling that I was a scientist peering down a microscope that allowed me to take pictures of this smalll sphere rotating below discovering microscopic things. I'd look at the pictures and realize that those things were 20 kilometers [12.4 miles] in diameter. You can't really see things that are smaller than that. 

II became really intersted in taking photos of landmarks and countries. I started using social media like Twitter and Flickr because I thought those things were interesting. I decided to start tweeting them to see what people thought. That turned out to be a pretty good source of enjoyment: finding people something special and tweeting it to people, asking them quizzes or riddles from space and seeing all the comments. It turned out to be a very enjoyaable way to spend time, letting everyone participate in this adventure.

HIW:  Were you asked to take the pictures by NASA or ESA?

PN: I wasn't asked to do it by NASA or the ESA. Soem of the other astronauts had done it before me. I was not the first. Several of  them told mne it was enjoyable. I did not tweet before  I went into space because I don't have musch time to do it. I see people go around wwith phones all day, typping what they are doing, clicking, clicking, clicking, but I have so many things to do. However, in space it worked out pretty wel. Sometimes when I was taking pictures I was asking help from ESAto identify what I was looking at. Other times II would guess but sometimes I would make a mistake, and people would correct me, so I learned it was better to verify what I was seeing before hallf of the world thinks, 'What is that stupid astronaut soing up there?!' One of teh first weeks I was up I tweeted a picture of a European city and really thought it was London. Turns out it was Paris. How can you make a mistake between London and Paris? It was beyond me. But in space, you travel so fast that you pass by so quickly, and you only have  a few seconds to snap a piture. You have no time to reseearch so mistakes do happen.  

HIWW: Did it feel like you were travelling at 17,000 mph?

PN: Well, it dpends. If you are above an ocean, for example, which happened often, it doesn't look like you are going fast. But if you want to take a picture of something specific, then you understand how precise youy need to be. I'm always on space time now. When i'm at home in the veening, and I look outside and see a sunset or moon. I see a nice picture and think 'Okay, I'm going to get ny camera and I'll take a picture in 30 minutes'. In space if you see the moon and you like it, you better take that picture in the next ten seconds because [otherwise] it's gone. A good sunset is eight seconds and you think. 'Oh, that's a nice sunset, I'll get my camera...Holy cow, I need a picture now, where's that camera!' If yoiu take out the card or wrong lens, then it's gone. [This is how I mainly pereceived speed on ISS.]

You don't feel anything physically on the ISS or the Soyuz capsule though. II remember when we detached teh sttation on Soyuz ob coming back to Earth, there is a momenet in which the engine fires and you slow down and go into the atmosphere, and the capsule breaks up into three pieces. You are in the middle, the only oen that gets to Earth; the others burn uyp in the atmosphere. At that point you are tumbling, finishing with a braking burn. The capsule has spearted and you are waiting to be captured by the atmosphere. Then you look outside and realize you are tumbling. It's not a nice feeling. Are we supposed to be tumbking, you think. If you don't look outside you don't feel it, even at Mach 25. 

HIW: What are your main roles oon the ISS?

PN: I was one of the flight engineers for the space station. We do a lot ofthings up there. The main purpose is to take advantage of the micro-gravity environment and the position of the ISS for all sorts of experiments. Most of them you cannot do on ground because of the presence of gravity. I would say that 30-40 per cent of the time was passed carrying out scientific experiments in many fields. I did some in life science -  for example, how my brain adapts to the micro-gravity environment, and all sorts of tests on computers and other stuff. The reason for the breain was because when you go into space you actaually eneter a new environment and the brain has to adapt to the new situation. It's very similar to someone on Earth who has an accident and loses a part of the brain or a limb and needs to re-learn to fo all these things.

In space suddenly there is no more gravity, and you can't walk, you hhave to push yourself, you have to do things in a new way. You have to iiinvent a way to do it by looking at how the brain adapts. DOing this enables scientists to figure out [techniques and therapies] that can be useful on theground. For example, I was a guinea pig for osteoporosis. They gave me a special diet for weeks, one week at antime. They were changing my diet, from having lots of proteins and other ones, lots of vegetablemproteins, and another one I tried was having lots of potassium, which is thought to interfere with the osteoporosis mechanism. They do all these things, they look at you and check your body parameters, figuring out of there are any relatively simple solutions, like does food affect how people lose bone mass?

About 50 per cent of my time was spent maiintaining the station. It's amazing how work intensive it is to maintain a laboratory like this. You have supply ships every month. It's like you lived in your house and never left, but once a month a truck would come to your front door and dock there. Everything you'd need for that month would be in that truck. The air you breathe, the water you drink, all the supplies, all the equipment, all the spare parts, pieces of the tubes for plumbing, electricity, a new TV, new computer, new telephone; I really mean everything. And then you have to take evrything from this truck and put somewhere you can find it again. You cannot just pile it up in space, because it floats away. After it's unpacked, you take all your watse, everything you don't need, and shove it inthe supply vehicle so that it gets thrown out and burns up in the atmosphere. That's a lot of work. Apart from the supply ship you need to cook, clean fileters and put together facilitoes so that you can carry out experimets. A lot of things go into basuc running of the space station.

The last ten per cent or so of my time was fpr physical fitness and educationa; or PR activties, such as taking to schools on the phone. My expedition actually had the record for schools contact -77 - whcih meant thousands of kids were talking to us. You do a a little video clip or this and that, or you do an interview; let's call it outrach activity Then in the evening, there is about an hour and a half for planned pre-sleep activities, then you have eight hours of sleep, after thta are one-and-a-half hours of post-sleep. In pre-sleep you

















































 



































































































 

































































































