An intervuew with an astronaut
by how it works team- 7/2/2012
https://www.howitworksdaily.com/an-interview-with-an-astronaut/

Italian Paolo Nespoli, 54, has spent 174 days in space accross two missions, travelling into Earth orbit on both NASA's Space Shutlle and the Russian Soyuz spacecraft. We asked what it's like to live in space, how it felt to witness the Space Shuttle docked to the ISS and more in our exclusive interview.

How It Works: Why did you decide to become an astronaut?

Paolo Nespoli:Ever since I was a little boy I wanted to become an astronaut. I was inspired by the Apollo missions, though not really Apollo 11. I was more interested in the later missions where they dorve the rovers inthe moon. I thought it was fascinating, with the astronauts jumping and diving around on the surface. Life was kind of different after that. I was drafted into the Italian army (they still had the draft back then) then figured out that I could make it as an astronaut. I applied twice to the European Space Agency (ESA) and didn't make it, but onthe third selection I made the cut. 

HIW: Your first mission to space was on board STS-120. What was it like going to space for the first time?

PN: I was selected fairly young and got to fly after just nine years of training., which is somewhat of a short time to wait compared to many. People asked if I 2was scared but I wasn't really. I'd trained so much, I knew what to expect. Feeling the acceleration in the Space Shuttle was amazing. The first couple of minutes it really shakes you. However, Iwas scared in space, because we'd trained for years and we only had 15 days to complete our mission. All I kept thinking to myself was, 'You better not mess this up. People have been working on this for years!' The fear of failure was the scariest thing about going into space. 

HIW: What was the hardest part of going to space?

PN: I didn't mind it so much in space, but my body felt really old when I can back to Earth; the gravity was so intense. I was fine in space, but I'm not exceptional or a superhero. Of the seven Shuttle crew memebers and three on the Souyz I was the worst coming back by far. The microgravity environment does a lot to your body. You lose a lot of calcium un space; your bones and muscles can get quite weak.

HIW: How did you ensure your body stayed in shape? How did you adapt to life in space?

PN: We'd do about two hours of physical fitness every day. I would say you come back in better shape [in terms of fitness]. Doing two hours of exercise every day for six months, I came back with more muscles and less fat than when I left. 
We did about one hour of cardiovascular exercise ona treadmill and another hour of resistance exercise. Obviously, you cna't lift weights in space, so a machine simulates the strain of lifting as on Earth. 

Ther's no training to prepare your body for its loss of balance. You get nausea and all sorts of things. Your skeleton also stretches (I was five or six centimeter taller than on Earth), and so muscles keep their strength but they are of a different length. Your body's equilibrium shifts, and when you come back to Earth the muscles start contracting again, but they cannot find the equilibrium point so easily. I remember shaking constantly. Also I could be sitting and feel tired. Coming back to Earth is definetely the hardest aspect of being in space-for me, anyway!

On the station, you are isolated and confined, with only a few other people to talk to. You can't just go out in the evenining and see people. For some reason I discovered that whatever I was doing I was seeing pizzas all over the pace, such as in clouds when ooking at Earth. Freud would probably have a lot to say about that! I thught the food on the station was decent but far away from what an Italian would say is delicious, It wa very goof froma nutritional point of view, but a little horrific for an Italian. Maybe I was craving pizza because of food like that, or maybe I was just associating pizza with going out with friends and having a beer, maybe that is what I was missing. You are in isolation up there, and there are a lot of things you can't do, a lot of things which aren't normal.

Sometimes you forget that you're in space. It takes about a month and a half before you get out of your 'Earth habits', getting used to space, doing things in a different wat. For examle, we had a table in one of the nodes for eating in the evening. That table had been there for years. It was horizontal in respect to the floor of the deck, because that's how a table is on Earth. It was protuding a lot, and you'd often hit it when going past. One day I was looking at it and I thought, 'There must be a way to do this better. Why is this table parallel to the deck, when there's no gravity?' You use Velcro to stick things to the table anyway so that they don't float away, so why not have it at an angle, like a technical drawing table? I kind of tilted it up a little bit, then more, and more, until finally, if you look at it now, it's tilted at a steep angle because you don't need a horizontal table and it's much more out of the way. It was there for ten years before somebody thought to move it!

I would say that it is an environment that is closed, isolated and confined. At first, when I was told I would spend six months onthe station before the mission, I thought, 'Oh my God, six months, are you out of your mind?' Looking back I realized that I did not have the time to do everything I wanted, like taking more pictures, looking at Earth, playing around more, calling people, doing video clips. You end up doing things up there that make sense, time flies and everything is nice, but you wish you could have done more.

HIW: What was your favorite aspect of living in space?

PN:I loved taking pictures, looking at the Earth and [re]discovering it. It was very enjoyable. You just got to the window and there you have it-a great and gorgeous view. However, when you go to te window randomly, more often than not you're just going to see an ocean with clouds. It's nice and blue, but that's about it. Sometimes you see a piece of land going by and it's nt recognizable. It's not easy to figure out what's what, except Italy! When you start talking about the UK and Ireland it gets complicted because of the anlge, cloud coverage, time of day and sun reflection, etc.In the beginning you try to figure out where you are wihtout using the software that tells us, but little by little you start to know what's going on. By the second/third/fourth omnths you look out the window and you know where you are-the continent,information,features that are there that you might want to take pictures of, or it it's borig you might spend a few minutes on something else. 

I started using more and more powerful lenses to capture some interesting details that I could see from up there. First I tried to see the Egyptian pyramids, the Great Wall of China, and other landmarks. I wanted to see an aircraft carrier at sea, some volcanoes, special islands, and then I started looking around randomly , taking pictures of things that were astonishing and different. I had this feeling that I was a scientist peering down a microscope that allowed me to take pictures of this small sphere rotating below, discovering microscopic things. I'd look at the pictures and realize that hose things were 20 kilometers [12.4 miles] in diameter. You can't reaily see things that are any smaller than that.

I became really interested in taking photos of landmarks and countries. I started using social media like Twitter and Flickr because I thought those things were interesting. I decided to start tweeting them to see what people thought. That turned out to be a pretty good source of enjoyment: finding something special and tweeting it to people, asking them for quizzes or riddles from space and seeing all the comments. It turned out to be a very enjoyable way to spend time, letting everybody participate in this adventure. 

HIW: Where you asked to take pictures between by NASA or the ESA?

P: I wasn't asked to do it by NAS or the ESA. Some of the astronauts had donde it before me. I was not the first. Several of them told me that it was enjoyable. I did not tweet before I went into space becasue I don't have much time to do it. I see some people go around with phones all day, typing what they are doibg, clicking, clicking, clicking, but I have so many things to do. However, in space it worked out pretty well. Sometimes when I was taking pictures I was asking fro help from ESA to identify what I was looking at. Other times Iwould guess but sometimes I would make amistake, and people would correct me, so I learned that it was better to verify what I was seeing before half of the world thinks, 'What is that stupid astronaut doing up there?!' one of the first weeks I was up I tweeted a picture of a European city and really thought it was London... turns out it was Paris. How can you make a mistake between London and PAris is beyond me. But tin space, you travel so fast that you pass by so quickly, and you only have a few seconds to snap a picture. Ypu have not ime to research, so mistakes do happen.

HIW" Did it feel like you were traveling at 17,000 mph?

PN: Well, it depends. If you are above an ocean, for exmaple, whic happened often, it does look like you are going very fast. But if you want to take a picture of something specific, there you understand how precise you need to be. I'm always on space time now. When I'm at home in the evening, an dI look outside and see a sunset or moon. I see a nice picture and think, 'Okay, I'm going to get my camera and I'll take a picture in 30 minutes'. In space if you see the moon you better take and you like it, you better take theat picture in the next ten seconds  because [otherwise] it's gone. A good sunset is eight seconds and you think, 'Oh, that's a nice sunset. I'll just get my camera,...Holy cow, I need a picture now, where's that camera!' If you take out the card or wrong lens, then it's gone. [This is how I mainly perceived speed on the ISS.]
You don't feel anything physically on the ISS or the Soyuz capsule though. I remeber when I detached from the station on Soyuz coming back to Earth, there is amoment in which the engine fires and you slow down and go into the atmosphere, and the capsule breaks p into three pieces. You are in the middle, the only one that get s to Earth, the others burn up in the atmosphere. At that pont you are tumbking, finishing with a braking burn. The capsule has separated and you are waiting to be captured by the atmosphere, Then you look outside and realize you 're tumbling. It's not a mnice feeling. Are we suppose to be tumbling, you think, if you dont look outside you dont feel it, even at Mach 25.

HIW" What were your main roles in the ISS?

PN: I was one of the flight engineers for the space station. We do a lot of things up there. The main purpose is to take advantage of the micro-gravity environment and the position of the ISS for all sorts of experiments Most of them you cannot do on ground because of the pressence of gravity. I would say that 30-40 percent of the time was passed carrying out scientific experiments in many fields. I did some in life sciences-for exmaple, how my brain adapts to the micro-gravity environment, and all sorts of tests on computers and other stuff. The reason fro the work on my brain was because when you go ito space you actually enter a new environment and the brain has to adapt to the new situation. It's very similar to someone on Earth who has an accident and loses a part of the brain or a  limb and needs to re-learn to do alll these things. 

In space suddenly tjhere is no moe gravity , and you cabn't just walk, you have to push yourself, you have to do things in a new way. You have to invent a way to do it by looking at how the brain adapts. Doing this enables scientists to figure out [techniques and therapuies] that can be useful on the ground. For example, I was a guinea pig for osteoporosis. They gave me a special diet fro weeks, one week at a time. They were changing my diet, from having lots of proteins and other ones, lots of vegetable proteins, and another one I tied was having lots of potassium, which is thought to interfere with the osteoporosis mechanism. They do all these things, they look at you and check you body parameters., figuring out if there are any relatively simple solutions , like does food affect how people lse bone mass?

About 50 percent of my time was spent maintaining the station. It's amazing how work intensive it is to amaintin a laboratory like this. ou have supply ships arriving every month. IT's like you lived in your house and never left, but once a month a truck would come to your fornt door and dock there. everythin you'd need for the month would be in that rruck. The air you breathe, the water you drink, all the supplies, all the equipment, all the spare parts, pieces of tubes for pulumbing, electricity, a new TV, new computer, new telephone. I really mean everryhting. And then you have to take everything from this truck and put somewhere you can find it again. You cannot just pile it up in spcae, becuase it floats away. After it's unpacked,you take all your waste, everyhting you don't need and shove it in the supply vehichle so that it gets thrown out and burns up in the atmosphere. That's a lot of work. Apart from the supply ship you need to cook, clean filters and put together facilities so that you can carry out experimments. A lot of things go into the basic running of the space station.

The last ten percent or so of my time was for physical fitness and educational or PR activities, such as talking to schools on the phone. My expedition actually had the record for schools contact- 77- whcih meant thousands of kids were talking to us. You do a little video clipfor this and that, or you do an interview, let's call it outreach activity. Then, in the evenining, ther is about an hour and a half for planned pre-sleep activiities, then you have eight hours of sleep, and after that are one-and0a-half hours of post-sleep. In pre-slpep you take care of yourslef, do recreational things, clean up, eat, this kind of hting. In the morning you're supposed to have breakfastm a shower, the usual things. What I would usuallly do would be to compress activities. I would not sleep eight hours, instead I'd sleep about six, which left me with three or four hours free in the evening. Then I could take more pictures, eat, sort out myphotos, put them up on Twitter and Flickr, or call some friends. On the space stationwe have a phone, and often write emails.

HIW: Can you call whenever you want?

PN: You can pretty much call when you want. It's a special phone- though looks similar to that you'd find on any desk. It works through a satellite system and since you are rotating pretty fast you tend to lose connection quickly and sometimes there are holes for 10-20 minutes. You can't use the phone continually. In general if I want to call somebody that evening one way or the other I manage to call them. In the evenings I mostly talked to my wife and daugther.

HIW: How do you shave on the ISS?

PN: This is one of the things you need to learn to do differently. Obviously you cannot always take a shower, as there's not much water and it goes all over the place. Shaving you need to learn to dothings in a hwole new way. First, I put a bit of water on my face, then take a pea-size amount of shaving cream and just make it stick there on my face. Next I take a fresh new razor blade andget shaving. Ther's no way you can actually clean the razor blade, so you just try to make it work for the whole face, and then throw it away. There's ntohing else you can do. Then you use a wet towel to rinse your face, and that's it.

HIW: How do you stay clean on the ISS?

PN: The pace station is now in its omplete assembly stage. All the planned modules are up there. For years they camped onthe station, but now we have what they call crew quarters. These are telephone booth-sized spaces that have your sleeping bag, computer, personal stuff onthe wall and changes of clothes, etc. You can close the door and it's pretty private and dark. Your turn the lights off and you're isolated and insulated; you cna't hear people outside. For a personal space it's quite convenient. You try to use it on the ground though and, oh my God,you never think you'll be able to sleep there because it's vertical and narrow. In zero-gravity though it becomes very comfortable. We do have a facility, wich technically is called the Waste Hygiene Compartment. It's another telephone booth-sized place that can be closed. Inside ther is your toilet, and you can take your clothes off and wash ina bit more comfort. We usually do wash ourselves in a piecemeal fashion here and there or just use atowel. If you want to take a showe, you go into this booth. We like to use this Russian towel, which is bery thin and impregnated with soapy disinfectant liquid, and you wrap this towel over your body. It's pretty nice and you feel pretty celan when you do this, For whaing your hair we have some rinse-less shampoo; youput three or four teaspoons of water in your hair, wrap it thorugh andthen dry up with a towel and then that's it.

we don't wash clothes up there; you just tend to sort of use the same clothes over and over. They don't get dirty because it's so clean up there. On Earth you go out and you'll get dust or grease all over them, but in space only bits of food might get on them. They don't particularly smel bad until a few months of use. In six months I used three pairs of trousers and I started with only four shirts. When they told me that's all I'd get for six months I could'nt belive it, but it was fine. When you do physical fitness you use a special shirt to collect sweat. You use it and then hang it to dry somewhere. We use this shirt for a month and it's fine.

On the station it's all pretty clean, but sometimes there's smell and we cannot open a window to get some 'fresh air'. Instead, the air is changed by the turnover systems and it's continuosly circulated, filtered and cleaned,, the humidity is removed, and some of the toxic things are removed. IT's pretty clean. There were cases that the carbon dioxide equipment was purposefully kept at alow rate, and then you feel a little bit of sapce dust, but normally we feel clean.

HIW: What was it like being the only person in history to see the Space Shuttle attached to the ISS?

PN: Well you know I never thought "Wow, I am the only person to see this with my own eyes, I'm the one taking the pictures that will be in history books'. IfI thought all this I would get scared, so I didn't. The maneuver to take the ppcitures was not an easy one. It had some risks and ther had been discussions forever between NASA and th Russian about this, because ther were supposed to doit on the previus Shuttle mission but it was voted down; the Russians didn't let them because of the risks. 

Iwas really concerned when I unstrapped from my seat and flew over the commander, who was manually piloting. There's not much space in the Soyuz, so everyone was worried I would knock some of the controls and send the Soyuz spinning out to the sky. Then we had to open the hatch, whcih was already sealed- also soemhting that is usually a big 'no'. If you have closed and sealed it t you don't want to go and break the seal, but we had to. Eventually I's up there, I'm looking outside and seeing this magnificient view, and it was astonishing. I found myself staring at it for 15 seconds, and then I had to snap myself out of it. 'You are here to take pictures,' I thought. 'You better take some or you will really become famous!' I grabbed the camera and started snapping pictures, trying to be attentive. I thought there was some reflection from the window and I was some m=smudges, so I was thinking 'wow, i hope there are coming out!'. In the end I took about 200 pictures and severak minutes of video.
It was funny becuase when we landed the camera was left inthe module to burn up in the atmosphere We only brought back the memory cards. When we landed the Russians requested me to surrender the memory cards to the commander of the Russian spacecraft, and he was instructed to leave them in the capsule. I didn't understand why they did this, because I wanted to see them immediately, but by doing this they were closed up and in the capsule which was being trasnported to Kazakhstan so moscow. It took soem time to get them; there's a big committee that sits down in Moscow and opens the hatch and pulls out hings. In the past things have 