Measles Cases Mount in Pacific Northwest Outbreak
Jonathan Lambert

A measles outbreak in Washington state prompted Gov. Jay Inslee to declare a state of emergency on Jan. 25.

As of Thursday, 55 case have been confirmed this year, most of them in unvaccinated children under age 10. The outbreak's epicenter is Clark County, Wash., just north of Portland, Ore.

Measles is a highly contagious disease that can result in brain damage, deafness, and, in rare cases, death. In 2000, measles was declared eliminated from the United States thanks to widespread vaccination campaigns.

Yet cases have popped up in 11 states so far this winter, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is tracking three outbreaks (defined as three or more confirmed case) in New York City, New York state and Washington state.

Vaccination rates around 90 to 95 percent are generally enough to prevent an outbreak, according to health officials, but rates have fallen across the United States.

One factor is the spread of misinformation about the measles vaccine, which is considered safe and effective by health authorities.


Honestly, I really have to figure out my public health research topic so let's do this now while I have time.
Now that I'm reading this article about vaccination, maybe I'll do some research about that because that is a hot, HOT topic right now. 
So is the opioid crisis and substance abuse disorder but I feel like so many people are exploring that so I might not be able to really delve into it.
Also, in terms of the opioid crisis, I really want to blend that with women's health or reproductive health somehow but I don't exactly know how to naturally make that link.
So maybe the move is vaccines. I could explore the availability of vaccines to homeless populations and corresponding outbreaks? Maybe I'll try researching the link between socioeconomic status and vaccinations
Alrighty guys, time to hit the books.

Okay, so I can't exactly do research and continuously type so maybe this isn't going to work. I think it's pretty obvious that people of higher socioeconomic status are the people denying their children of vaccines so maybe that isn't a relevant topic to explore.
Also, I feel like there's definitely very many topics I want to explore but since I'm essentially just compiling and analyzing other people's research, that isn't really a very good option.

Maybe resume-wise it would be more advantageous to explore a topic in the field of opioids if I want to continue to conduct research.
At the same time, this vaccine idea came to me and it seems like it is on a platter so...

Below this is my vaccine discussion that I need and is the topic I will likely explore.


Okay, so the paper I am reading says this:

Although immunization completion rates were high at school entry, low levels of immunizaiton coverage were found in all areas of Virginia at 24 months of age regardless of SES, population density, or race.
That's kind of crazy, why are rates so low in Virginia across the board?

Provider practices seems to play a big part in vaccination which makes sense. This particular article notes that not simultaneously delivering vaccines in poorer communities led to under-immunization.

Now this article claims that Black people specifically sought out vaccines the most often and were unable to receive them which makes sense because realistically rich, white parents are the ones to deny their kids of vaccines.

What is the relationship between socioeconomic status and vaccination rates in children?
Lower SES is indicative of lower vaccination rates among children (makes sense, can be attributed to lack of education/ accessibility)
BUT also, small subsets of those of higher SES also represent areas of low vaccination rates.

I think that's a good research question option.

My TA's name is Balint

ok so, we're scrapping the idea of everything and going back to the opioids, the DRUGS

I'm just going to work on my IFP assignment instead.


ASSIGNMENT #2
Write two pages describing a person from your childhood from a child's point-of-view. Use as hard and critical an eye as you wish, but make sure you're making the observer and observed sound like real people. Use descriptive language rather than emotional, reactive language. Decide in advance how old your child observer is, and stick with that age.

So I think I am going to describe maybe a friend, like a neighbor. Or maybe I'll describe like a little girl expressing her love for a girl or fear of a bully.

This is hard times honestly, damn.

Wow I find it so genuinely difficult now to use PCs. I remember a time when I never thought I would get used to my Mac. 

Also, why am I not good at mental math anymore. I just had to do basic addition and it was really a struggle, that's kinda concerning honestly. 


I am struggling generally in life, we're j chillin.

I'm excited for sister dinner tonight, it'll be rushed because I have been running from place to place all day for eternity but I'm so excited to see my parents.
It hasn't even been that long but it still is really genuinely nice to see them and since it's such a last minute thing it's even better because it's almost like a surprise. 
Love my parents they're really the best.

I'm also scared about the whole physics thing.

Now that I know I can take it online, I should be fine in general but I have to find courses still and get them approved and then there's the whole problem of lab.
Which I guess I'll have to take at Hopkins? Separately? So frustrating those stupid frickin labs.
But also, really excited to start research next or next-next week. It'll be the time of our lives. 
Never felt this way before. And I swear. This is true. And I owe it all to you.

Honestly, if I wrote a stream-of-consciousness novel in the character of myself going at it for an entire novel, it would take me like maybe a day to write a sizable book.
Really my brain will lead me where I do not want to go sometimes. 

But right now, I'm having a ton of fun on Pansy Pal dates. So far I've had three so I'm definitely getting into the swing of things.

Since Katie let me in on the 411 regardings bigs/ littles, I've been mentally ranking everyone just like I ranked sororities.
Lots of ranking, lots of work but it is definitely the easier part which I can appreciate. 
Right now the ranking is as follows:
1. Aspen (obviously)
2. Shauna (who I had such a good time with, and she likes going out, and she's just really nice and cool)
3. Ro (we talked for like 2 hours about various things and it was good fun, just not as viscerally stimulating as my conversation with Shauna)
4. Katie (which makes me sad because Aspen and Liv love her literally so much but she's a bit awkward for my taste, literally a sweetheart but definitely not best friend material for me I'd say)
honestly I'm not even 100% how people like Aspen and Liv love LOVE her because they are so vastly different from her but maybe it's more of the oh, I love hanging out with you thing and confiding in you and 
you're a general sweetheart and less of a our personalities don't exactly congeal. 

Honestly, I like the word congeal but maybe it's a little gross to other people.

I have sister dinenr at 7:30 so I think the move is to get there on time and stay for about an hour and then come back to my room so I can put away all my clean clothes and pack for the overnight. Honestly, I need to wash my hair and get my hectic ass life together but whatever, there's no time for that.
I'm at least grateful for the time I have right now because I didn't expect this experiment to be so frickin chill honestly, I thought it would be far more intense and involved but right now I'm just chillin relaxing and letting all my thoughts out. Maybe later I'll do my IFP assignment as well but the problem with that is that I like having a solid time to contemplate and figure out what I want to write about so I can't just word vomit and continuously type if I'm trying to write something of realistic quality.


okay it is so much harder to do it this way lmao

it's definitely giving me kind of a headache just because it forcefully cross-eyes me

i definitely won't be able to do anything of worth like this and honestly this just makes me want to have a break but the $75 venmo is worth it I will not lie.

also, I realistically need to be out of here by 6:55 to run back to the express shuttle but the likelihood of that happening I feel like is little to none so who am I even kidding at this point

it's so strange that grown adults have to use this standing desk things just to avoid getting heart disease because they're just so sedentary

honestly, the easiest way to lead a healthy life is to be active daily and I don't mean exercise because honestly, that's easy to get out of and hard to get into so that's a lethal combination. I mean being active in terms of job or career is the easiest thing to do basically. don't even have to go out of your way to exercise

Honestly the standing is tiring me tf out and I am ready to succumb to death but we are chillin and will get through this hard time. honestly, I am not exactly sure when I'm going to draft a research question or write my IFP assignment but here's hoping that I'll figure it out

i was just about to complain that I wanted a break via the alarm going off but I regret junxing myself because I honestly did not.


anyway the work I have for the weekend is:

and I think that's all my classes but that's a good amount of work for a weekend that I'll be away.

On my next break, I am going to Google Map the trip length to Baltimore because my parents just left from home at 5:42
Hopefully I don't keep them waiting because they wouldn't like that and I would feel guilty doing that. It is another hour to Virginia after all


honestly, I think that's everything. What can i say, I'm a simple girl. But anyway, I am kind of getting used to the perturbed conditions, still not pleasant but think of the catharsis of taking off this heavy vest and annoying goggles.
I'm ready for another alarm to go off if I'm being honest

Also, if backpacking was evenly distributed weight like this, I still wouldn't love it by any means but I would definitely enjoy it more than I do now.

I wonder how much time has passed, at least 15 minutes I would think. But then again, even on break I can't sit so what's the point of looking forward to that amiright?

Anyways, going to Google Map it, going to eat a good dinner hopefully with some fun girls and it'll be a good time. I am always constantly stressed but it really be like that sometimes.
Honestly, I haven't had a coffee date with Aspen yet and I don't know if I will but I hope that it all works out with the bigs and the little. I definitely want someone who I'll be very close with and also who cares about Theta. I feel like that's not too much to ask for if I'm honest.
Also, why the heck on earth did Ratna text me, where are u. Woman. Where do you think I am. What a wild one.

I keep forgetting I have a banana in my backpack that keeps making everything smell but it's not black yet! so basically it's fine

I love Ikea meatballs so much. I know this is a strange shift in discussion topic but it is true. 

I have adjusted to the glasses which is so weird but now my vision is copmletely normal. But also, when she had me take my glasses off to do the alignment color test it was probably a trainwreck because the lines were spaced apart because I am cross-eyed now. This is really hard times.

Also, this vest is a literal core workout but it's fine because I needed a workout today anyway. Also, it's insane that they got so many responses but I feel like astronaut study sounds awesome and then you also get paid a good amount of money.

My arms are definitely getting tired but also it's cool to think that this is even remotely related to astronauts but honestly, the connection is not that strong

It's not like I'm running in those weightless chambers/ air treadmills or something but btw those are so frickin cool.

I really need to set a rock climbing schedule with Gwen and a workout schedule but it's so much work that it's kinda frustrating. Also, with all the moving parts in my schedule like HERO shifts really makes it difficult because non-mandatory stuff comes in last place of priorities. Hopefully, I can settle into a rhythm (nice! I spelled it right...after a couple tries) before the semester literally ends.

Thank god for the warmth though, it's one of the only things keeping my seasonal depression at bay and keeping my soul alive. Also, first chirality lab went okay, so that definitely felt reassuring. I'll be okay in that class. Spanish, I have to work a little harder at and I can't really judge my standing until I really spend time studying for a quiz or test but I am managing so far. Orgo actually makes quite a bit of sense to me and it feels good that everything has sort of come together but still, I won't know anything until I start studying and actually test. Research methods really should be just fine since it's actually just one paper. I don't know, it doesn't take a semester to write one 8 page research paper if I'm honest but I am grateful for the time.
I think that's all 5 of my classes, in order of worriedness I feel about them
(1) chirality
(2) spanish
(3) research methods
(4) orgo
(5) ifp 

and that ranking is definitely not accurate of how much work each class gives because that's a whole different thing. but yeah my courseload isn't too bad. I really would like to take physics lab not at Hopkins but that might not be an option unfortunately. Maybe I'll try to take one lab but I think it has to be calculus based so that's not really an option I don't think.

I am 11 minutes into this and am ready for a break via the alarm game thing. I think it's funny that they're using the literal alarm clock that I use to force myself to wake up for an actual official experiment but good on them but the utility and practiciality. Anyway, my arms are really starting to hurt and since I got used to the cross eye placed in the specific way, I have to go bck to adjusting which is kind of a frustrating experience just like learning a third languaeg when you were born bilingual or learning an additional instruments years after you started your others. Clearly, I can very heavily relate to both of those situations and both have the same "energy" as the kids these days would say. I am honest to god ready to stop doing this so thank god (at least I think) this is my last rotation of doing this. We are now 15 minutes in I think. I don't know we've already gone over this the brain cells I have lost on weekends were the ones linked to eloquence and mentle math. The things you do to have fun for real. Honestly, every time that alarm goes off I thing it's an ambulance which is obviously commonplace in my life and also we're near a hospital so I keep getting confused. I feel like personally for me that's not the best alarm but what are they going to do, psychoanalyze every single participant. I think not.

My forearms are kinda burning I think literally from just holding them up on this stand. It's kinda funny because essentially this is a workout substitute for rock climbing. Anyway, I love making money this way, definitely something I'm going to share with the 'rents when I see them. I only have two minutes left and she's going to do all the stress test stuff so


okay so I'm going to have to email myself all of this stuff so I am going to make moves to do that right now

TO SAVE:

(1) ifp reading - complete tonight
(2) ifp assignment - complete sunday
(3) research methods question - complete sunday
(4) spanish assignments - complete tonight
(5) chirality lab - complete tomorrow night
(6) orgo review - complete tomorrow night

packing list-
-IFP book
-laptop
-chargers
-folder/notebook
-pjs
-2 outfits
-contacts, etc.
-toothbrush
-face wash
-medicine
-deodorant 
-hairbrush 
-moisturizer

I made moves and emailed it to myself so we're chilling

honestly it's so much nicer not standing, wearing that vest, and those glasses I feel great would recommend 

I have to continue to text this poor girl that has to walk me to my sister dinner it's kinda culty but also maybe it's just a safety,

greenway is also not a common place to live so there's that

but anyway I want to get hazed so badly but here we are staying PG

boo, boring stuff but hopefully we can shake it up son.
that's so fun honestly I think I'm goint to take 18 credits next semester because hard times honestly
I am ready, ready, ready to be done with this and honestly, I am definitely curious as to what it is about and how this experimentation translates to research but I don't have time to ask

I have to finish get my money and then dip immediately. Realistically, I'm not going to be able to make the 7 PM express and that sucks but I will get over these hard times. At least there will be a JHMI pretty often, it's just sad that local takes so damn long to get back to campus.

I'm excited to have a meal with Liv and Gwen, hopefully our useless asses can plan something of substance.

Miss singing a lil bit but not enough to do something about that actively. On the note of IFP, Mira has such great story ideas and I feel like I didn't express enough appreciation for her writing when we were in class which makes me a bit sad. I emailed the stuff to myself and I am ready to bring this to a close. My fingers aren't tired or anything but I guess my brain is tired if not bored. I am ready to be done. Which I may have said already. But I wouldn't know because I have three brain cells left so. Also, regrettable decision not wearing a jacket because it is so, so windy but also I haven't had a chance to stop by my dorm since literally the morning so it be like that sometimes.

Damn I have a lot of typos, not sure what's going on with that. Honestly, I find typing a very satisfying activity, especially when I am doing it fast and continuously because I feel like I associate the mechanism with productivity. But when I'm actually doing work or being productive most of the time I don't happen to be typing quickly because I type a little. Stop and think. Type some more. Delete. Delete. Delete. Think again. So typing assignment is not nearly as viscerally satisfying as just typing quickly and efficiently. 

I wish I didn't have work this weekend because it would be nice to have some actual time off but I'll get through this hard time. Maybe. Maybe not. But I'm certainly not making that express bus...rip. Also, I feel like I schedule things in time that's supposed to be free and then I somehow manage to become unfree via something mandatory and then I just have way too much on my plate. I like being in constant motion but also it would be nice to have just a second to myself to wash my hair and clean my room and watch some tv. But realistically, we're a ways away from that yet. But we are not a ways away from being done with this experiment. I'm ready to goOOooo. Shoutout to old Panic! At the Disco, what a time in my life. Thank god I didn't spend all that time typing/ copying an article verbatim. That was not working for me. Love emulating Holden Caulfield instead. Can't believe I have to take my backpack to sister dinner. Again, really not the best setup but hopefully it's not absolutely freezing when I get out there. Fingers crossed. I think that's a good note to leave this on so it would be nice if someone called it quits right now. Or...........................now. Or it could even be possibly maybe if you considered strongly the possibility of right at this moment that's to say right now. 

I have clearly run dry on trains of thought. I'm sure there are plenty backed up in there but they are delayed at the previous station. I know, what an analogy. But honestly, I'm pretty sure it's been 20 minutes. Whatever I'm probably wrong so I'm j chillin

I am very excited to eat.