An interview with an asstrnaut
BY HOW IT WORKS TEAM: 07/02/2012

Italian Paolo Nespoli, 54, has spent 174 days in space across two missions, travelling into Earth orbin on both NASA's Space Shuttle and the Russin Soyuz spacecrat. We asked what it's like to live in space, how it felt to witness the Space Shuttle docked to the ISS and more in our exclusive interview.

How it works: why did you decide to become an astronaut?
Paolo Nespoli: Ever since I was a little boy I wanted to become an astronaut. I was inspired by the Apollo missions, though not really Apollo 11. I was more interested in the later missions where they drove the rovers on the moon. I thought it was fascinating, with the astornauts jumping and driving around on the surface. Life was kind of different after that. I was drafted into teh Italian army (they still had the draft back then) then figured out that I could make it as an astornaut. I applied twice to the European Space Agency (ESA) and they didn't make it, but on the third selection I made the cut.

HIW: Your first mission to space was on board STS-120. What was it like going to space for the first time?

PN: I was selected fairly young and got to fly after just nine years of training, which is somewhat of a short time to wait compared to many. People asked if I was scared but I wasn't really. I'd trained so much, I knew what to expect. Feeling the acceleration in the Space Shuttle was amazing. the first couple of minutes it really shakes you. However, I was scared in space, because we'd trained for years and we only had 15 days to complete our mission. All I kept thinking to myself was, "You better not mess this up. People have been working on this for years!" The fear of failure was the scariest thing about going to space.

HIW: What was the hardest part of going to space?

PN: I didn't midn it so much in space, but my body felt really old when I came back to Earth, the gravity was so intense. I was fine in space, but I'm not exceptional or a superhero. Of the seven Shuttle crew members and three on the Soyuz I was the worst coming back by far. The micro-gravity environment does a lot to your body. You lose a lot of calcium in space; your bones and muscles can get quite weak.

HIW: How did you ensure your body stayed in shape? How did you adapt to life in space?

PN: We'd do about two hours of physical fitness every day. I would say you come back in better shape [in terms of fitness]. Doiong two hours of exercise everyt day for six month, I came back with more muscles and less far than when I left. We did about one hour of cardiovascular exercise on a treadmill and another ohur of resistance exercise. Obviously, you can't lift weights in space, so a machine simulates the strain of lifting on Earth. 
There's no training to prepare your body for its loss of balance. You get nausea and all sorts of things. Your skeleton also stretches (I was fice or six centimeteres taller than on Earth), and so muscles keep their strength they are of a different length. Your body's equilibrium shifts, and when you come back to Earth the muscles start contracting again, but they cannot find the equilibrium point so easily. I remember shaking constantly. Also I could be sitting and feel totally tired. Coming back to Earth is definitely the hardest aspect of being in space - for me, anyway!
On the station, you are isolated and confined, with only a few other people to talk to. You can't just go out in the evening and see people. For some reason, I discovered that whatever I was doing I was seeing pizzas all over the place, such as in clouds when looking at Earth. Freud would probably have a lot to say about that! I thought the food on the station was decent but far away from what an Italian would say is delicious. It was very good from a nutritional point of view, but a little horrific for an Italian. Maybe I was craving pizza because of food like that, or maybe I was just associating pizza with going out with friends and having a beer, maybe that is what I was missing. You are in isolation pu there, and there are a lot of things you can't do, a lot of things which aren't normal.
Sometimes you forget that you're in space. It takes baout a month and a half before you get out of your 'Earth habits', getting use to space, doing things in a different way. For example, we have a table in one of the nodes for eating in the evening. That table had been there for years. It was horizontal in respect to the floor of the deck, because that's how a table is on Earth. It was protruding a lot, and you'd often hit it when going past. One day I was looking at it and I thought, 'There must be a way to do this vetter. Why is this table parallel to the deck, when there's no gravity?' You use Velcro to stick things to the table anyway so that they don't float away, so why not have it at an angle, liek a technical drawing table? I kind of tilted it up a little bit, and then more, and more, until finally, if you look at ti now, it's tilted at a steep angle because you don't need a horizontal table and it's much more out of the way. It was there for ten years before somebody thought to move it!
I would say that it is an environment that is closed, isolated and confined. At first, when I was told I would spend six monthds on the station before the mission, I thoght, 'Oh my God, six months, are you out of your mind?' Looking back I realized that I did not have the time to do everything I wanted, like taking more pictures, looking at the Earth, playing around more, calling people, doing video clips. You end up doing things up there that make sense, time flies and everything is nice, but you wish you could have done more.

HIW: What was your favorite aspect of living in space?

PN: I loved taking pictures, looking at the Earth and [re]discovering it. It was very enjoyable. You just go to the window and there you have it - a great and gorgeous view. However, when you go to the window randomly, more often than not you're just going to see an ocean with clouds. It's nice and blue, but that's about it. Sometimes you see a piece of land going by and it's not so recognizable. It's not easy to figure out what's what, except Italy! When you start talking about the UK and Ireland it gets complicated because of the angle, cloud coverage, time of day and sun reflection, etc. In the beginning you try to figure out where you are without using the software that tells us, but little by little you start to know what's going on. By the second/third/fourth months you look out the window and you know where you are - the continent, information, features that are there that you might want to take pictures of, or it it's boring you might spend a few minutes on something else. 
I started using more and more powerful lenses to capture some interesting details that I could see from up there. First I tried to see the Egyptian pyramids, the Great Wall of China, and other landmarks. I wanted to see an aircraft carrier at sea, some volcanoes, special island, and then I started looking around randomly, taking pictures of things that were astonishing and different. I had this feeling that I was a scientist peeering down on a microscope that allowed me to take pictures of this small sphere rotating below, discovering microscopic things. I'd look at the pictures and realize that those things were 20 kilometers [12.4 miles] in diameter. You can't really see things that are any smaller than that. 
I became really interested in taking photos of landmarks and countries. I started using social media like Twitter and Flickr because I thought those things were interesting. I decided to start tweeting them to see what people thought. That turned out to be a pretty good source of enjoyment: finding something special and tweeting to to people, asking them for quizzes or riddles from space and seeing all the comments. It turned out to be a very enjoyable way to spend time, letting everybody participate in this adventure. 
Paulo Nespoli and Russian cosmonaut Dmitri Kondratyev take pictures of the Earth in the Cupola module on the ISS.

HIW: Were you asked to take the pictures by NASA or the ESA?

PN: I wasn't asked to do it by NASA or the ESA. Some of the other astronaut had mad done it before me. I was not the first. Several of them told me that it was enjoyble. I did not tweet before I went into space because I don't have much time to do it. I see some people go around with phones all day, typing what they are doing, clicking, clicking clicking, but I have so many things to do. However, in space it worked out pretty well. Sometimes when I was taking pictures I was asking for help from ESA to identify what I was looking at. Other times I would guess but sometimes I would make mistake, and people would correct me, so I learned that it was better to verify what I was seeing before half of the world thinks, 'What is that stupid astronaut doing up there?!' One of the first weeks I was up I tweeted a piture of a European city and really thought it was London...Turns out it was Paris. How can you make a mistake between London and Paris? It was beyond me. But in space, you travel so fast that you pass by so quickly, and you only have a few seconds to snap a picture. You have no time to research, so mistakes do happen.

HIW: Did it feel like you were travelling at 17,000mph?

PN: well, it depends. If you are above an ocean, for example, which happened often, it doesn't look like you are going very fast. But it you want to take a picture of something specific, then you understand how precise you need to be. I'm always on the space time now. When I'm at home in the evening, and I look outside and see a sunset or moon. I see a nice and think, 'Okay, I'm going to get my camera and I'll take a picture in 30 minutes', In space if you see the moon and you like it, you better take that picture in the next ten seconds become [otherwise] it's gone. A good sunset ieight seconds and you think, 'Oh that's a nice sunset, I'll just get my camera...Holy cow, I need a picture now, where's that camera!' If you take out the card or wrong lens, then it's gone. [This is how I mainly preceived speed on the ISS.]
we
You don't feel anything physically on the ISS or Soyuz capsule though. I remember when we detached from the station on Soyuz coming back Earth, there is moment in which the engine fires and you slow down and go into the atmosphere, and the capsule breaks up into three pieces. You are in the middle, the only one that gets to Earth; the others burn up into the atmosphere. At that point you are tumbling, finishing with a braking burn. The capsule has separated and you are waiting to be captures by the atmosphere. Then you look outside and realize you're tumbling. It's not a nice feeling. Are we supposed to be tumbling, you think. If you don't look outside you don't feel it, even at Mach 25. 

Getting that perfect picture on the ISS can be difficult, says Paolo.

HIW: What were your main roles on the ISS?

PN: I was one of the flight engineering for the space station. We do a lot of things up there. The main purpose is to take advantage of the micro-gravity environment and the position fo the ISS for all sorts of experuents. Most of them you cannot do on ground because of the presence of gravity. I would say that 30-40 percent of the time was passsed carrying out scientific experiments in many fields. I did some in life science - for example, how my brain adapts to teh micro-gravity environments, and all sorts of tests a new environment and the brain has to adapt to the new siton computers and other stuff. The reason for the work on my brain was beccaus ewhen you go into space you actualy enter a new environment and the brain has to adapt to the new situation. It's veery similar toto someone on Earth who has an accident and loses part of the brain or a limb and needs to re-learn to do all these things.
In space suddently there is no more gravity, and you can't just walk, you have to push yourself, you have to do things in a new way. You have to invent a way to do it by looking at how the brain adapts. Doing this enables scientists to figure out techniques and thereapies that can be useful on the ground. for exmple, I was guinea pig for osteoporosis. They gave me a spcial dient for weeks, one week at a time. They were changing my diet, from having lots of proteins and other ones, lots of vegetable proteins, and another one I trued was having lots of potassium, which is thought to interfere with the osteoporosis mechanism. they do all these things, they look at you, and check your body parameters, figuring out if there are ny relatively simle solutions, like does food affect how people lost bone mass? 

About 50 per cent of my home was spent mainting the station, it's amazing how work intensive it is to maintain a laboratory live this. You have supply ships arriving every month. It's like you lived in your house and meer left, but once a month a truck would come to your front door and dock there.Veverything you'd need for that month would be in that truck. the air you breath, the water you drink, all the supplies, all the equipment all the spare parts, pieces of tubes for pumbiling, electricity, a new TV, new computer, new telephone. I wreally mean everything. And then you have to take everything from this truck and put somewhere you can find again. You cannot just ple it up in spac, because it floats away. After it's packed, you take all your waste, everything you don't need and shove it in the supply vehicle so that it getsthrown out and bums up in the atmosphere. that's a lot of work. Apart from the supply ship you need to cook, clean filters and put together faclities so that you can carrry out experiments. A lot of things go into the basic running fo the space station. 
the last ten per cent or so of y time was for physical fitness and educational or PR activites such as talking to schools on teh phone. My expedition actuallly had the record for schools contact -77 - which meant thousands ore talking to us. You do a little vieo clip for this and taht, or you do a interview, let's call it outreach acvitity. then you have eight ohours of sleep, and after tgat are one and a half hours of post sleep. In pre-sleep you take care of do recreational thin, clean up, eat, this kind of thing. In the morning you're supposed to have breakfast, a shower, the usual things. What I would usually do would be to compress excitivies, would not sleep eight hours, instead I'd sleep about six, which left me with three or four hours free in the evening. then I coudl take more pictures, eat, sort out my photos put them up on twitter and Flickr, or call some friends. On the space station we have a phone, and often write emails.

HIW: Can you call whenevr you want?

PN: You can pretty much call when you want. It's a psecial phone -  though looks similar to that you'd find on any desk. It works throught a satellite system and since you are rotating prety fast you tend to lose the connection quiclly and sometimes there are holes for 10-20 minues. You can't use the phone continually. In general, iff I want to call somebody that evening one way or the other I manage to call them in the evenings. I mostly talked to my wife and daughter.

HIWL How do you shave on the ISS?

This is one fo the things you need to learn to do fiferently. Obviously you cannot always take a shower, as there's not much water and it goes all over the place. Shaving you need to alearn to do things in a whole new way. Fuiust I put a bit of water on my phase, then take a pea sie amount of shaving cream and pjust make it stick there on my face. Next I take a frehs new razon blade and get shaving. There;s not way you can actyally clean the razor blade, so you try to make it work for hte whole face, and then throw it away. There's nothing else you can do. Then you yse a wet towel tto rise your face, and that's it.

HIW: HOw do you stay cleab ob tge USSL'

PNL The space station is now in its complete assembly stage. All the planned modules line up there. For years they camped on the station, but now we have what they call crew quarters. There are telephone both-sized spacers that have your sleeping bag, computer, personal styff on the wall and changes of clothes, etc. You can close the door and it's pretty pruvate and ddarl. You turn the lifhts off and you're isolated and unsylated; you can't hear people outside. For a personal space it's quite convenients. You try to use it on the groun thogh, and oh myGod, you never think you'll be able to slepe there because it's vertical and narrow. In zero gravity thought it becomes very comfortable. We do have a facility which technically is called  te Waste Hygiene Compartment. It's another telephone booth sized space that can be closed. Inside there is your toilet, and you can take your clothes off and wahs in a littel bit more comformt. we usually do wahs ourselves in a piecemeal fashion here and there or just use a towel. If you want to take a shower, you go into this booth. We ilke to use this Russian towl, which is veliquid, and you wrap this towel over your body. /It's pretty nice and you feel pretty clean when you do this. For washing your hair we hry thin and iumpregnated with soapy disinfectant we gace some rinse-less shampoo, you put tres or four teaspoos of water i yoru hair, wrap it through and then dry up wwith a towel and then that's it. 

We dn't wash clothes up there, you just tend to sort of use the same clothes over and over They don't get dirty because it;s so clean up there On Earth, you go out and oyu'll get dust or grease all over them, but in space only bits of food might get on them. The don;t particularly smell bad until a few omnths of yse In six months I used only three pairs of trousers and I started with only four shirts. When they told me that's al I'd get for six months, Icouldnt believe it, but it was fine. When you do physical fitness you use a special shirt to collect sweat. You use it and then hang it to dry sourposefully kep at a low rate, and then you feel a little bit of ewhere. We use this sma ehisrt for a montha nd it's fine. 

On the station it's all pretty clean, but sometimes there's a smell and we cannot open a window to get some 'fresh air'. Instead, the air is changed by the turnover systems and it's continuously circulated, filtered and cleaned, and the humidity is removed, and some of the toxic things are removed. It's pretty clean, There were cases that the carbon dioxide equipent was purposefully kept at a low rate, and then you feel a litte bit of space fdst, but normally we feel very clean.

HIW: What was it like being the only person in history to see the Space Shuttle attached to the IDD?

PN: Well you know, ever thought 'Wow, I'm the only person to see this with my own eyes, I;m the only one taking the pictures that willl eb in the history books'. If I thought akll this I would get scared, so I didn't. Maneuver to take th epictres was not an easy one. It some risks and there had been discussions forever between NASA and the Russians about this, becayse they were supposed to do it on the previous Shuttle mission but it was voted down, the Russians didn't let them because of the risks. 
I was really concerned when I unstrapped from my seat and flew over the commander, who  was manually piloting there's not much space the Soyuz, so everyone was worried I would knock over some of the controls and send the Soyuz spinning out of the sky. Then we had to open the hatch, which was already sealded - also something that is usually a big 'no'. If you have cloed and sealed it you don't want to go and break the seal, but we had to. Evnetually I'm up there, I'm lookign outside and seeing this magnificent view, and it was astonishing. I found myself staring at it for 15 seconds, and then I had to snap myself out of it. 'You are here to take pictures,' I thought. 'You better take osme of you will really become famous!' I grabbed the camera and started snapping pictures, trying to be attentive. I thought there was some reflection from the window and I saw some smudges, so I was thinking 'Wow, I hope these are coming out!'. In the end I took about 200 pictures and several minutes of video.

Paolo took this historic and iconic photo of Space Shuttle Endeavor docked to the ISS from Soyuz TMA-20 on 23 May 2011. It was the only time NASA's Space Shuttle had evern been pictured attached to the ISS.

It was funny because when we landed the camera was left in the module to burn up in the atmosphere. We only brought back the memory cords. When we landed the Russians requested me to surrender the memory cards to the commander of the Russian spacecraft, and he was instructed to leave them in the capsule. I didn't understand why they did this, becaue I wanted to see them immediately, but by doing this they were closed up in the capsule which was being transported from Kazakhstan so Moscow. It took some time to get them; there's a big committee that sits down in Moscow. It took some time to get them; there's a big committe that sits down in Moscow and opens the hatch and pulls out things. In the past things have disappeared and broken, so a big commitee pulls out everything and classifies everything that's supposed to be there, things astronauts bought back. The checked, marcked, verfied and certified everything, but when this was all done, more than 15 days after landing I was scared; I was think the reason they are not releasing is because they have screwed up and lost them, but they came out and it was fine. Phew!


HIW: Will you, or would you link to, go into space again?

PN: Well, if I had a choice, 1 would love to go up for another mission. I feel now that I know what's going on up there, so I could love to do things differently, pace myself better, and enjoy things a bit more. The reality is that flight opportunities are scarce - even more so for Europeans - and we have young astronauts that have never flow, so it's kind of a situation where many things go into the decision process. At this point I would like to go up again and I'm ready if that were to be the case, but if not I have been to space and I have so lucky to realize a dream I've had since I was a kid, and I'm very grateful for that.

All images courtesy of NASA/ESA

EXT. LOVELL HOUSE - BACK YARD - NIGHT

Looking up at the Moon, JIM LOVELL tries blocking the Moon with his thumb, which entirely covers the Moon.

[Here is how the movei departs frm the actua mission. The night of the Apollo 11 landing the moon was actually a waning crescent. And the moon set at 11:54 pm CDT Houston time, before the moonwalk was comleted. So Lovells' scene where he holds his thump up had to happen well before the moonwalk]

["BEYOND THE SEA" performed by Bobby Darin plays in the background]

MARILYN LOVELL state's the obvious.

MARYLYN LOVELL
- You're drunk, Lovell. 
JIM LOVELL
-Yeah, I'm not used to the Champagne. 
MARILYN LOVELL
- Me neither. I can't deal with cleaning up. Let's sell the house.
JIM LOVELL
- All right. Let's sell the house. They;re back inside now, looking up at as. Ain't that something?
MARILYM LOVELL
- - I bet Jenny Armstrong doesn't get a wink of sleep tonight. ah, when you were on the far side on Eight, I didn't sleep at all. I just vacuumed over and over again.
JIM LOVELL
- Christopher Columbus, Charles Lindbergh and Neil Armstrong. Neil Armstrong. From now on we'll live in teh world when man has walksed on hte Moon. It's not a muracle. We just decided to go. Apollo 8 - we were so close. Just sixty nautical midles down and ...Mmm. It was like just step out, and walk on the face of it. I wanna go back there.
MARILYN LOVELL
- Where's my mountain?
[












