Italian Paolo Nespoli has spent 174 days in space across two missions, traveling into Earth orbit on both NASA`s Space Shuttle and the Russian Soyuz spacecraft. We asked what it`s like to live in space, how it felt to witness the Space Shuttle docked to the ISS and more in our exclusive interview.
How it works:Why did you decide to become an astronaut?
Paolo Nespoli:Ever since I was a little boy I wanted to become an astronaut. I was inspired by the Apollo missions,though not really Apollo 11. I was more interested the later missions where they drove the rovers on the moon. I thought it was fascinating, with the astronauts jumping and driving around on the surface. Life was kind of different after that. I was drafted into the Italian army (they still had the draft back then) then figured out that I could make it as an astronaut. I applied twice to the European Space Agency (ESA) and didn`t make it, but on the third selection I made the cut.


HIW: Your first mission to space was on board STS-120. What was it like going to space for the first time?


I was selectedfairly young and got to fly after just nine years training, which is a short time to wait compared to many people. People asked if I was scared but I wasn`t really. I`d trained so much, I knew what to expect. Feeling the acceleration in the Space Shuttle was amazing. The first couple of times it really shakes you. However, I was scraed in space, because we`d trained for years and we only had 15 days to complete our mission. All I kept thinking to myself was, You better not mess this up. People have been working on this years! The fear of failure was the scariest thing about going into space.

HIW: what was the hardest part of going to space?
   
PN: I didn`t mind it so much in space, but my body felt really old when I came back to Earth; the gravity was so intense. I was fine in space , but I`m not exceptional or a superhero. Of the seven Shuttle crew members and three on the Soyuz I was the worst coming back by far.The microgravity environment does a lot to your body. You lose a lot of calcium in space, your bones and muscles can get quite weak.


HIW: How did you ensure your body stayed in shape? How did you adapt in space?


PN: We`d do about two hours of physical fitness every day. I would say you come back in better shape ( in terms of fitness). Doing two hours of exercise every day for six months, I came back with more muscles and less fat than when I LEFT.


We did about one hour of cardiovascular exercise on a treadmill and another hour of resistance exrcise. Obviously, you can`t lift weights in space, so a machine simulates the strain of lifting as on Earth.


There`s no training to prepare your body for it`s loss of balance. You get nausea and all sorts of thigs. Your skeleton also stretches (I was five or six centimeters taller than on Earth), and so when you come back to Earth the muscles start contracting again, but they cannot find the equilibrium point so easily. I remember shaking constantly. Also I could be sitting and feel totally tired. Coming back to eartth is definitely the hardest aspect of being in space-for me anyway!


On the station, you are isolated and confined, with only a few other people to talk to I discovred that whatever I was doing I was seeing pizzas all over the place, such as in clouds when looking at Earth. Freud would probably have a lot to say about that! I thought the food on the station was decent but far away from what an Italian would 
 


