An interview with an astronaut. by how it works team - 07/02/2012 https://www.howitworksdaily.com/an-interview-with-an-astronaut/

Italian Paolo Nespoli, 54, has spent 174 days in space across two missions, travelling into Earth orbit on both NASA's Space Shuttle and The Russian Soyuz spacecraft. We asked what it's like to live in space,how it felt to witness the Space Shuttle docked to the ISS and more in our exclusive interview.

How it Works: Why did you decide to become an astronaut?
Paolo Nespoli: Ever since I was a little boy I wanted to become an astronaut. I was inspird by the Apollo missions, though not really Apollo 11. I was more interested in the later missions where they drove the rovers on the moon. I thought it was fascinating, with the astronuants jumping and driving around on the surface. Life was kind of different adter that. I was drafted into the Italian Army (They still had the draft back then) then figured out that i could make it as an astronaut. I applied twice to the European Space Agency (ESA) and didnt make it, but on the third selection i made the cut.

HIW: Your first mission was on board STS-120. What was it like going to space for the first time?

PN: I was selected fairly young and got to fly after nine years of training, which is somewhat of a short tie to which compared to many. People askedif i was scared by i wasn't really. I'd trained so much, i knew what to expect. Feeling the acceleration in the Space Shuttle was amazing. The first couple of miniutes it really shakes you. However, I was scared in space, because we'd trained for years and we only had 15 days to complete our mission. All i kept thinking to myself was, 'You better not mess this up. People have been working on this for years!' The fear of failure was the scariest thing about going into space.


HIW: What was the hardest part of going to space?

PN: I didn't mind it so much in space, but my body felt really old when I came back to Earth; the gravity was so intense. I was fine in space, but I'm not exceptional or a superhero. Of the seven Shuttle crew members and three on the Soyuz i was the worst coming back by far. The microgravity environment does a lot to your body. You lose a lot of calcium in space; your bones and muscles can get quite weak.

HIW: How did you ensure your body stayed in shape? How did you adapt to life in space?

PN: We'd do about two hours of physical fitness every day. I would say you come back better in shape [in terms of fitness]. Doing two hours of exercise every day for six months, i came back with more muscles and less fat than when I left.

We did about one hour of cardiovascular exercises on a treadmill and another hour of resistance exercises. Obviously, you can't life weights in space, so a machine simulates the strain of lifting as on Earth. 

There's no training to prepare your body for its loss of balance. You get nausea and all sorts of things. Your skeleton also strethces (I was five or six centimeters taller than on Earth), and so muscles keep their strength but they are of different length. Your body's equilibrium shifts, and when you come back to Earth, the muscles start contracting again, but they cannot find the equillibrium point so easily. I remember shaking constantly. Also I could be sitting and feel totally tired. Coming back to Earth is definitely the hardest aspect of being in space - for me, anyway!

On the station, you are isolated and confined, with only a few other people to talk to. You can't just go out in the evening and see people. For some reason I discovered that whatever I was doing I was seeing pizzas all over the place, such as in clouds when looking at Earth. Freud would probably have a lot to say about that! I thougth the food on the station was decent but far away from what an Italian would say is delicious. It was very good from a nutritional point of view, but a little horrific for an Italian. Maybe I as craving pizza because of food like that or maybe i was just associating pizze with going out with friends and having a beer, maybe that is what I was missing. You are in isolation up there and there are a lot aof things you can't do, a lot of things which aren't normal. 

Sometimes you forget that you're in space. It takes about a month and a hald before you get out of your 'Earth's habits', getting used to space, doing things in a different way. For example, we had a table in one of the nodes for eating in the evening. That table had been there for years. It was horizontal in respect to the floor of the deck, because that's how a table is on Earth. It was protruding a lot, and you'd often hit it when going past. One day I was looking at it and I thought, 'There must be a way to do this better. Why is this table parallel to the deck, when there's no gravity?' You use Velcro to stick things to the table anyway so that they don't float away, so why not have it at an angle, like the techical drawing table? I kind of tilted it up a little bit, then more, and more, until finally, if you look at it now it's tilted at a steep angle because you don't need a horizontal table and it's so much more out of the way. It was there for ten years before somebody thought to move it!

I would say that it is an environemtn that is closed, isolated, and confined. At first, when I was told I would spend six months on the station before the mission, I thought 'Oh my God, six months, are you out of your mind?' Looking back I realized that I did not have the time to do everything I wanted, like taking more pictures, looking at Earth, playing around more, calling people, doing video clips. You end up doing things up there that make sense, time flies and everything is nice, but you wish you could have done more.

HIW: What ws your favorite aspect of living in space?

PN: I loved taking pictures, looking at the Earth and [re]discovering it. It was enjoyable. You just go to the window randomly, more often than not you're just going to see an ocean with clouds. It's nice and blue, but that's about it. Sometimes you see a piece of land going by and it's not so recognizable. It's not easy to figure what's what, except Italy! When you start talking about the UK and Ireland it gets complicated because of the angle, cloud coverage, time of day and sun reflection, etc. In the beginning you try to figure out where you are without using the software that tells us, but little by little you start to know what's going on. By the second/third months you look out the window and you know where you are - the continent, information, features that are there that you might want to take pictures of, or if it's boring you might spend a few minutes on something else.

I started using more and more powerful lenses to capture some interesting details that I could see from up there. First I tried to see the Egyptian pyramids, the Great Wall of China, and other landmarks. I wanted to see an aircraft carrier at sea, some volcanoes, special islands, and that I started looking around randomly, taking pictures of things that were astonishing and differnet. I had this feeling that I was a scientist peering down a microscope that allowed me to take pictutres of this small sphere rotating below, discovering microscopic things. I'd look at the pictures and realize that those things were 20 kilometers [12.4 miles] in diameter. You can't really see things that are any smaller in that. 

I became really intersted in taking photos of landmarks and countries. I started using social media like twitter and flickr because I thought those things were interesting. I  decided to start tweeting them to see what people thought. That turned out to be a pretty good source of enjoyment: finding something special and tweeting it to people, asking them for quizzes or riddles from space and seeing all the comments. It turned out to be very enjoyable way to spend time, letting everybody participate in this adventure. 

HIW: Were you asked to take the pictures by NASA or the ESA?

PN: I wasn't asked to do it by NASA or the ESA. Some of the other astronauts had done it before me. I was not the first. Seevral of them told me that it was enjoyable. I did not tweet before I went to space because I don't have much time to do it. I see people going around with phones all day, typing what they are doing, clicking, clicking, clicking, bit I have so many things to do. However, in space it worked out pretty well. Sometimes when i was taking pictures I was asking for help from ESA to identify what I was looking at. Other times I would guess but sometimes I would make a mistake, and people would correct me, so I learned it was better to verify what I ws seeing before hald of the world thinks, "what is that stupid astronaunt doing up there?! One of the first weeks I was up there I tweeted a picture of a European city and really thought it was London... Turns out it was Paris. How can you make a mistake between London and Paris? It was beyond me. But in space, you travel so fast that you pass by so quickly, and you only have a few seconds to snap a picture. You have no time to research, so mistakes do happen.

HIW: Did it feel like you were traveling at 17,000mph?

PH: Well, it depends. If you are above an ocean, for example, which happened often, it doesn't look like you are going very fast. But if you want to take a picture of something specific , then you undertand how precise you need to be. I'm always on space time now. When I'm at home in the evening, and I look outside and see the sunset or the mooon, I see a nice picture and think, 'Okay, I'm going to get my camera and I'll take a picture in 30 minutes'. In space if you see the moon and you like it , you better take that picture within the next ten seconds because [otherwise] it's gone. A good sunset is eight seconds and you and ou think 'Oh, that's a nice sunset, I'll just get my camera. Holy Cow, I need a picture now, where's that camera! If you take out the card or wrong lens, then it's gone. [This is how I mainly perceived speed on the ISS.}

You don't feel anuthing physically on the ISS or the Soyuz capsule though. I remember when we detached from the station on Souz coming abck to Earth, there is a moment in wheich the engine fires and you slow down and go into the atmosphere., and the capsule breaks up into three pieces. You are in the middle, the only one that gets to Earth, the others burn up in the atmosphere. At that point you are tumbling, finishing with a breaking burm. The capsule has seperated and ou are waiting to be captured by the atmosphere. Then you look outside and reaalizing you were tumbling. It's not a nice deeling/ Are we supposed to be tumbling, you think. If you don't look outside, you don't feel it, even at March 25.

HIQ: What were your main roles in the ISS?
o
PN: I was one of the flight engineers for the space station. We do a lot of things up there. The main purpose is to take advantage of the micro-gravity environment and the position of the ISS for all sorts of experiements. Most of them you cannot do non ground because of the presence of gravity. I would say that 30-40 per cent of the time was passed carruying out scientfici experiments in tmany fields. I did some life science - for examlpe, how my brain adaprts to the micro-gravity enviroment, and all sorts of tests on computers, and other stuff. The reason for the works on my brain was because when you go into space you actually enter a new environment and the brain has to adapt to the new situation. It's very similar to someone on Earth who has an accident and loses a part of the brain or limb and needs to re-learn to do all these things.

In space suddenly ther eis no more gravity, and you can't just walk, you have to push yourself, you have to do htinggs in a new way. You have to invent a way to do things by looking at how the brain adapts. Doing this enables scientists to figure out {techiques and therapies} that can be useful on the ground. For example, I was a guinea pig for osteoporosis. Theu gave me a specal doet oet fpr weeks, noe week at a time. They were changing my diet, frpm having lots of protein and other ones, lots of vegetables proteins, and the osteoporosis mechanism. They do all these things, they look at you and check your body parameters, figuring out if there are any relative simple solutions, like does foos affect how people lose bone mass?

About 50 per cent of my time was spent maintaining the station. It's amazing how work intensitve it is to maintain a laboratory like this. You have supply ships arriving eveny month. It's like you lived in you rhouse and never left, but once a month, a truch would come to your front door and dock there. Everything you'd need for that month would be in that truck. The air you brethe, the water you drink, all the supplies, all the equipment, all the spare parts, peiece s of tubes for plu,bing, electricity, a new TV, new computer, new telephone, I really mean everything. And then you have to take everything from teh truck and out somewhere you can find again. You cannot just pile it up in space. because it foarrds awayAfter it's unpacked, you take all your waster, everything you don't need and shove it into the supply vehicle so that it gets thrown out and burns up int the atmosphere. That's a lot of work. Apart from teh supply ship you would neeed to cook, cleam filters, and put together facilities so that you can carry out experiments. A lot fo things go into the basic running of the space station. 

The ast ten per cent or so of my time was for physical fitness and education or PR activities, such as talking to schools on the phone. My expedition actually had the record for schools contact - 77 - which meant thousands of kids were talking to us. You do a little video clip forthis and that, or you do an interview, let's call it outreach activity. Then in the evening, there is about an hour and a half hours of post-sleep. In pre-sleep you take care of yourslef, do recreational things, clean up, eat, this kind of things. In the morning you're supposed to have breakfast, shower, the usual things. What I would usually do ould be to compress actvitiies. I would not sleep eight houts, instead I'd sleep about six., which left me with three or four hours free in the evening. THen I could take more pictures, eat, sort out my photos, put them up on Twitter and Flicker, pr call some friends. On the space station we havw a phone, and oftern write emails.

HIW: Can you call whenever you want?

PN: You can pretty much call when you want. It's a special phone = though it looks similar to that of you;d find on any desk. It works through a satelitte system and since you are rotating pretty fast you tend to lose the connection pretty quicky and sometimes there are holes for 10-20 minutes. You can't use the phone continually in general if you want to call somebody that evening one way or the other i manage to call them in the evenings imostly talked to my wife and daughter. 

HIW: How do you shave on the ISS?

PN: This is one of the things you need to learn to do differently. Obviously you cannot always take a shower, as there's not much water and it goes all over the place. Shaving you need to learn to do things in a whole new ay. Firt, I put a bit of water on my face, then take a pea size amount og shaving cream and jst make it stick there on my face. New I take a fresh new razor blade and get shaving. There's no way you can actually clean the razor blade, so you just try to make it work for the wholw face, and then throw it away. There's nothing else you can do. Then you use a wet towel to rinse your face, and that's it/ 

HIW" How dp you stay clean on the ISS?

PN: The space station is now in its complete assembly stage. All the planned modules are up there. Fo years they camped on the station but now we have what they call crew quarters. These are telephone booth sized spaces that have your sleeping bag, computer, personal stuff on the wall and change of clothes, etc. You can close the door and it's pretty private and dark. Your turn the lights off and you're isolated and insuated; you can't hear people outside For a personal space , it's quite convenient. You try to use it on the ground though and oh my god you never think youll be able to sleep there because ir's verital and narrow. It zero gravity, though it becomes very comfortable. We do have a facility, which techically is called the Waste Hygeine Compartment. It's another telephone booth sized spaced that can be closed. Inside there is a toilet, and you can take yoru clothes off and wash in a bit more comfort. We usually do wash outselves in a piecemeal fashion here and there or just use a towel. If you want to shower, you go into this booth. We like to use this Russian towl, which is very thin and impregnated with soapy disinefant liquid, and you wrap this towel over your body. It's pretty nice and you feel pretty clean when you do this. For washing your hair we have a rinse-less shampoo; you put three or four teaspoons of water in your hair, wrap it through and then dry up with a towel and then that's it.

We don't wash clothes up there; you tend to sort of use the same clothes over and over. They don't get dirty because it's so clean up there. On Earth you go out and you'll get dust or grease all over them, but in space only bits of food might get on them. They don't particularly smell bad until a few months of use. In siz months, I used only three pairs of trousers and I started with only four shirts. When they told me that's all I'd get for six months, I couldn't believe it, but it was fine. When you do physical fitness yo uuse a special shirt to collect sweat. You use it and then hang it dry somewhere. We use this same shirt for a month and it's fine/ 

On the station, it's a;; prettty clean, but sometimes there's a smell and we cannot open a window to get some 'fresh air'. Instead, the air changed by the turnover systems and it's continuously circulated, filtered and cleaned, the humidity is removed, and some of the toxic things are removed. It's pretty clean. There were cases that the carbon dioxide equiment was purposefully kept at a low rate, and then you feel a little bit of space dust, but normally we feel very clean

HIW: What was it like being the only person in history to see the Space Shuttle attached to the ISS?

PN: Well you know, I never thought 'Wow, I'm the only person to see this with my own eyes, I'm the one taking the pictures will be in history books'. If I thought all this I would get scared, so I didn't. The maneuver to take the pictures was not an easy one. It had some risks and there had been discussions forever between NASA and the Russians about this, because they were supposed to do it on the revious Shuttle mission but it was voted down; the Russians didn't let them because of the risks.

I was really concerned when I unstrapped from my seat and flew over the commander, who was manually piloting. There's no space in teh Soyuz, so everyone was worried I would knock some controls and send the Soyuz spinning out of the sky. Then we had to open the hatch, which was already sealed - also something that is usually a big 'no'. If you have closed and sealed it you don't want to go and break the seal, but we had to/ Eventually I'm up there, I'm looking outside and seeing this magnificent view, and it was astonishing. I found myself staring at it for 15 seconds, and then I had to snap myself out of it. 'You are here to take pictures,' I thought. 'You better take some or you will become famous!' I grabbed the camera and started snapping pictures, trying to be attentive. I thought there was some reflection from the window and I saw some smudges, so I was thinking 'Wow, I hope these are coming out!' In the end I took about 200 pictures and seevral minutes of video. 

It was funny because when we ladned the camera was left in the module to butn p in the atmosphere. We only brought back memory cards. When we landed the Russians requested me to surrender the memory cards to teh commander of the Russian spacecraft, and he was instructed to leave them in the capsule. I didn't understand why they did this, because I wanted to see them immediately, but by doing this they closed up the capsule which was being trasnported from Kazakhstan so Moscow It took some time to get them; there's abig committee that sits down in Moscow and opens the hatch and pulls out things. In the past tings have diappeared and broken, so a big committee pulls out everything and classifies everything that's supposed to be there, things astronaunts brought back. They checked, marked, verified, and certified everything but when this is done, more 

