there are a number of ways to manage the ension on your floats. one way is to go up a needle size ahdn working colorwork but do swatch to make sure you gauge remains accurate to the pattern you
re followin
when working stranded fabvirc with tow or more colors, one color the dominant colors will always be the mroe prominant on the right side vc the wrong side while the other receds to the backgroupd. 
the effect is referred to as color cominance and is a result of how the a yarns are stranded in relationship to one another on the ws of the fabric as you work.
to accompany the colorwork charts in our patters we provide a key showing which colors should be held as the domonant color
regarldesss of yow you hodl your yarns when working stranded colorowork, hte float of the color in each hand is the easiest way to manage color dominance is to hold the dominant color in your left hand t

the easiest way to manage color domiance is to hold the dominant color in your left hand and strand it below the backgroup and 

keepiing your dominant color and background color consistent will ensure that your colorowork motifs pop raither than recede into the bakcground. notice how in the peerie swatch the dominan1we 

we believe swatching is an important part of the procesing of beingnig in any project. for stranded colorowkr knitting is particular, swatching may beven meore invaluable, as it allows for the oppurutinity to practice stranding techniques get axquatined with the mechanixas of working with multiple strands of yarn and test color ocomivinations before comming to a larger project

of their kntting. in researching the topic futher it seems that the majority of us are on the tighter partybus. 
now, even after knitting a few patterns with stranded colorowrk fi find myself with areas i wanted to oimprove on. the learning never stops, nowr iwould i want it too. buti have a few little tricks ive learned along the way that have helped me and will hopefully get you to jump on the ever so popular work band wagon becSUE I WOULDN'T WANT TO INDIMATIONS TO STOP LIKE IT STOPPED ME . 
THAT BAND WAGON OR SHOULD WE CALL IT A PARTY BUS IS too pun

knitters either knit stranded color work at a looser tension or a tighter thension than the resea
the constrasting color you are using to createyour paters is generally the one that should be dominant. all this means is that wehn working with your strands keep the constrasting color on the bottm. it has a longer strand when carried on the bottom which allows for more slack and thereby less likely to reced into your work 
in the secodmn [hoto im ready to knit i will keep that strand crossing over the top of the constrasting color,. not only will this keep the back of your work tidy but it allows for only consistency in holding  


To swatch for a stranded colorwork motif we recommend the speed swatching method for circulard knitting becs most stranded colorowkr matters are worked in the round, it is best to swatch in the round as well. follow the 
consistency in holding the strands in your fingers and with the magic memory power you will get a nice momentum going.

If you are on my bus we knit at a much tigheter tension it really is trial and error as we all knit different. first i went up one needle size. felth great, a 

this is something new i tried wit hthis latest design that you are getting a little sneask peak of. im using bissock in gris and dr pure in nuit for my contrasting color. the idead firstpopped into my head when the pattern on ithe front is \

theres also the topic of long floats,. a sloat is the strand of yarn that is not being knit but rather being loosely carried behind the knit sts. it seems as though a majority of knitters consider crossing yarn over more than  five sts
a long float. i guies it depends on the person
i like this knitting without rulees vibes. while i follow some riles by the book
other times you really need to do the best for your knitting project. if you havea long float
all you need to do is catch in=t in the yarn you are currently knitting with and conintue knitting  

in the above the niuit strand is being carried ober 7 sts. to avoid the strand being too long, place it over the top of the gris gris and continue to knit the raminig sts. you can catsh the yarn after 3-4 sts theres no really rule

The reason you want to avoid long floats is to avoid getting your fingers or jewelry caust into them while putting on your sweater. in that if you want to carry your yarn across 7 sts and are not concerned about a long float, then by all means, have long floats

block your work
Lastly but most definetly not least improtance, block your work. in my books blocking is majoic. you may have areas of concern in your work whether its color work or not but let me tell you, blocking more than likely resolve any little issues you ahve going on
You'd be sucprised at how the uneven sts or sligh

As you know, youll be following along with a pullower ill be knitting from a 194p's pattern bestway #82 its available as a pdf from 
but since my goal is to cover begging and adv techniques 

stranded knitting refers to knitting with multiple colors in a signle row with the unused color carried or stranded along the back when its not in use. hence the name stranding. 
usually thats limited to two colors but you may find 3 or more colors in some icelandic and scandinavian traditional patterns, for example, occasionally in vintage patters. 

vintage stranded patterns from the 1930 -1960s almost always use the term fair isle to refer to stranded and inarsia patters,. so i may include the term periodically.

The first thing you need to think about when starting a stranded knitting project is the fact hta youre going to have to deal with two balls of yarn at a time the basic idea is simple, knit a certain number of sts in the first color, knit a certain number

 method one.
cary both strands of yarn in your left can. 
alterante knitting with the background color and the main color, when i knit normally i knid of hook the working yarn iwth my finger when i throw so t

method 2: carry one strand of yarn in your left hand, and one strand of yarn in your right hand. 
This means getting comfroatble doing a knit stis. in both styles of knitting . both continental and throwing
Heres a tip": you might find that you don't tension the yarn or carry it across yoru hand the same way with both hands. that's fine 
In 
method 3: carry one strand of yarn at a time, dropping it and picking up the next color when you get that sts. this means kniting with color a and dropping it, knittign with color b dropping it
knitting with color a 
in full disclosure the example above wouldnt happen in you were actually knitting with tue hands, as like i said, the yarn naturally stays over or under each other

Not only will being consistent mean you wont be spending half or you 


consistency is a big step. but the second ball is juggling. almost litteraly, where do they both go. to yoru left or right 
if you knit with 
If you knit with method 2, its easy. put the yarn youre carrying in your let hand on your left side and the yarn on your right hand on your right side 

colorwork bougue knitting 

whether its basic stripes or complex fair isle, colorwork adds an eye catching element to your kniting 'these techniques create unique designs and ofter a way to esxpress individuality through color selection
use the patterns we've rproc

