According to the Pan American Health Organization, "Telemedicine has a role in providing solutions to the challenges posed by socioeconomic changes in health care systems in the 21st century (greater demands on health care, aging populations, increased mobility of citizens, ...global competitiveness, and improved health care provision), all in an environment of limited budgets and restrictions on spending." At its core, telemedicine aimrs to facilitate access to high-quality health services, which is critical for the improvement of health outcomes. With doctors unevenly distributed across Latin American countries and concentrated in urban areas, patients in rural and marginal suburban areas may have limited access to providers--particularly specialized providers. Numerous health service strategies to address the gap in the distribution of health workers in several of Latin America and the Carribbean have failed to achieve the hoped-for outcomes. Challenges to providing efficient access to health services exceeds supply because of unexpectedc events (for instance, disease outbreaks or disasters) or changing health conditions (including increases in chronic illness for an aging population). According to the United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), the region has one of the fastest-growing senior populations in the world. 

ECLAC recommends that Latin American countries incorporate the use of information and communication technologies to address the health needs of their populations. Arguably, the use of telemedicine (the process of providing medical expertise from a remote location for clinical diagnosis or consultation) to reach undeserved sites provides an opportunity to address the problem with the distribution of healthcare providers in Latin America. 

Telemedicine is expanding in Latin America, but its widespread, sustainable use has not yet been scaled up to broad national, and regional programming. Studies indicate that the organizational, physical, and technological characteristics of a region's health care must be taken into consideration when new models are being proposed for the deployment of e-health solutions (health services and information delivered or enhanced through the internet and related technologies). The literature has also recognized the role of the cultural context and core cultural values in the health care process, which may have implications for telemedicine adoption and the virtual patient-provider encounter process. 

The purpose of this article is to provide a profile of telemedicine across nine diverse Latin American countries using data reported in a 2017 survey of Latin American hospitals and the 2015 World Health Organization (WHO) Global Survey on eHealth. Lessons from the lengthy US experience with telemedicine indicate that it is a complex system with multiple barriers to overcome. Frameworks of telemedicine challenges recognize this long history and provide an approach to describing high-level domains of interrelated telemedicine barriers hat fundamentally consist of regulatory, financial, legal, technological, organizational, and human factors (adoption) domains. Correspondingly, the global challenges to telemedicine expansion recognized by recent WHO and Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) reports can be mapped to these barrier domains. Therefore, we used these domains as a framework to provide a broad look at the Latin American telemedicine landscape. We sought to enhance understanding of the use of telemedicine in Latin America and develop new recommendations for its expanded use.

Given that telemedicine is conceptually without borders, this profile may inform policy makers and health care leaders about the potential direction for orchestrating  resources within and across these countries and may also inspire partnerships with nations in other continents (including the United States) to better address the health service needs in the countries studied.


The SURE program was an opportunity that I will always be thankful for. Although I was passionate about research prior to joining this program, at the Brady, I was able to understand what a true research ...i was able to witness a collaborative and supportive research environment like no other one I had ever seen. As a member of the Lupold lab, I was able to engage in innovative research proojects under the mentorship of a supportive PI, Dr. Shawn Lupold.IIn addition, I was surrounded by individuals like Dr. Coffey, who showed me why they were so passionate abou the work that they did and for the advancement of science. After my time at the Brady had come to an end, I had no doublt that a career in research where I  could work at an academic research center like Johns Hopkins Medicine would be a career I envisioned myself being a part of. Tiday< I am continuing my work in research and I am becoming  more confident with the specific research questions I would like to expore as an investigator. I hope that this will be a start of a career where I'll be able to learn the lessons from my time at the Brady and continue engaging in high-quality research woth the intention of applying this research awith the intention of not only expandinging scientuific understanding but to also make contributions thatr will have a positive impact on society. Dr. Lupold  an his team were a team where I felt comfortable asking questions in but they 
With the lupold lab, I was supported at eevery step of the researc h process but was also pushed out of my comvfort zone and encouraged to explore the unkonwn in scientific research, With the experience I had in that lab, Itpday, I have the confidence to formulate independent research questions and to start to look for the answers with little to nno supervision. This is a skill that has been tremendously helpful in making me more confident as a researcher. ISome specific members in the lupold lab that were instrumental in help


goals for the spring:

quatitativw methods in health disparities research. 
governmental budgeting with roy meyers
tnesois research with Dr. McLaren
prepare the poster for AcademyHealth poster for the annual research conference. 
work on R tutorials for both research and work
learn tosee the new research papers of interest as they are publisge\hed and keep up to date with that.
sutdy for the GRE.. both math and verbal. read a chapter a daty and do practice problems and use flash card app to practice vocabulary for the study. for vocab words, try to review 


learnmath tricks for the GRE everyday abd practice, I now have over 6 practice exams and can get my hands on more of then so a few practice tests per month is important. this will be helpful in making sure that I am more comfortable with the topics that I;ll ne working on. this is notonly going to increase my confidence in the material but it will make me more comfortabke with taking the test ahead of the test day . this is great to heaveso that the test will be a breeze. I'll especially need to learn specific topics like the right triangles and other specific GE math topics that I havent been working on for a while.  My goal is to have high percentiles for both exams or rather both sections of the examswhch is needed in order fpr ee to be competitive for the test.  In addition to the academyhhealth conference that I'll hopefully attend, this is also a good opportubity to attend the human factors conferecnce this fall ibn Seattle to present research from the NASA project.  There wikll be chances for me to help om other publications as well for both NASA and simuleader and QSRS research.  I should also reach out to the MCB group about being more in volvec with their research as well. . I am especially interest in learning about the bias research question about how bias is found in the patient medical record.  furthermore, the MVV project needs to move forward so you'll have to pushg mike along so he can get those sections done. the most urgent part the needs to get done is getting the data from the hoospital websites in ordwer to have this data before Mike leaves for paternity leave. this will give me the opportunity to then begin analyzing the data and also to learn natural language processinbgv data as it comes along to me. This will requiere a learbning curve but can be done with some practice. With learning this method more, there is hopefully the chabnce to apply these skills in doing the experiment for the acacdemy of management discoveries paper that Mike told me about. These are both very good opportunities for me to learn about the methodological questions and skills that can be useful across many research settings, invl\cluding health policy and more. Hopefully this should help improve my skillset for approaching research from a more methods perspecti e which is highly usefyul across many research settings



review 3 vocab words per day and make note of the ones that yhou do not know. Cap the new words of the day to 15 and review then a few times per day on order to make sure I understand themn more,


One of the main lessons learned from the US is that telemedicine adoption will further expand when it is viewed from a health system perspective and not as a collage of stand-alone projects aligned to the sometimes conflicting interests of governments, donors, and private organizations. Policies to accelerate the adoption of telemedicine must consider its issues under each interrelated domain (regulatory, legal, financial, technological, organizational, and human factors) and must support discussion spaces that involve policy makers, health care leaders, professional associations, and funders in establishing and subsequently promoting a systematic strategy to create opportunities to address the health needs of the population, notably by broadening access to care through telemedicine.
This approach to telemedicine will be critical for the expansion of access to health care services to populations living in underserved communities in Latin America and other similar places across the world. Currently, there are regions that are critically underserved and this should be an incredible help.



The HIV/AIDS epidemic has largely fueled the resurgence of tuberculosis (TB) in Sub-Saharan Africa. The relative risk of TB doubles in the first year after HIV infection and contines to rise as CD4 counts drop, reaching rates 20- to 37-fold higher than those without HIV. Co-infection is particularly prevalent in South Africa, where co-infected patients make up 62% of TB cases compared to the 13% global average. TB has been the leading cause of death in South Africa for over a decade, and is the leading cause of death among AIDS patients. In 2010, TB accounted for 11.6% deaths in Sounth Africa, compared to 3.4% for HIV alone and HIV/TB con-infection (9th largest cause of death). Today, South Africam has the third highest TB incidence rate in the world after Swaziland and Lesotho, with a rate of 860 per 100,000 population compared to the global average of 126. Because HIV/AIDS drives the TB epidemic, investments in care for HIV/AIDS patients, such as anti-retroviral therapy (ART), are likely to have significant positive spillovers to TB outcomes. The national rollout of ART in South Africa between 2004-2008 provides a unique opportunityh to examine the population-level impact of ART on the TB epidemic. During this period over US $1 billion was spent on the rollout, ART was introduced at approximately 400 health facilities, and more than 500,000 patients were enrolled on ART. This program, which dwarfed previous invests in TB care such as TB-DOTS, increased adult life expectancy by 11.3 years.

This study estimates the impact of ART on TB, and is only the second study to capture the benefits of ART investment on TB 