An interview with an astranaut
by how it works team 07/02/2012

Italina Paolo Nespoli, 54, has spent 174 days in space across two missions, travelling into Earth orbit on both NASA's Space Shuttle and the Russina Soyuz spacecraft. We asked what its like to live in space, how it felth to witness the Space Shutte docked t the ISS and more in r exclusive interview.

How it works: Why did you decide to become and astronaut?
Paolo Nespoli: Ever since I was a little biy I wanted to become an astronaut. I was inspired by the Apollo missions, though not really Apollo 11. I was more interesed in the later missions where they drove the rovers on the moon. I though it was fsacinating, with the astronauts jumping and driving around on the surface. Life was kind of different after that. I wwas drafted into teh Italina army( they still had the draft back then) then figured out that I could make it as an astronaut. I applied twice to teh Europena Sapce Agency (ESA) and didn't make it, but on the third selection I made the cut.

HIW: Your mission to space was on board STS-120. What was it like going to space for the first time?

PN: I was selected fairly young and got to fly after jus nine years of traininfg, which is somewhat of a short time to wait compared to many. People asked if I was scared but I wasn't really. I'd trained so much, I knew what to expect. Feeling the acceleration in the Space Shuttle was amazing. The first couple of minutes it really shakes you. However, I was scared in space, beacuase we had trained for years and we only had 15 days to complete our mission. All I kept thinking to myself was," You better not mess this up. People have been working on this for years!" the fear of failure was the scariest thing about going to space.

HIW: What was teh hardest part of going to space?

PN: I didn't mind it so much in space, but my body felt really old when I came back to Earth; the gravity was so intense. i was fine in space, but I'm not exceptional or a superhero. If teh seven Shuttle crew members and three on the Soyuz I was the worst coming back by far. The micro-gravity envirom=nment does a lot to your body. You lose a lot of calcium in space; your bones and muscles can get quite weak.

HIW: How did you ensure yor body stayed in shape? How did you adapt to life in space?

PN: We'd do about two hours of physical fu=itness every day. I would say you can come back in beter shape [in terms of fitness]. Doing two hours of exercise every day for six months, I came back with more musclesand less fat than when I left.
We did about one hour of cardiovascular exercise on a treadmill and another hour of resistance exercise, Obviously, you can't lift weights in space, so a machine simultes the strain of lifting as on Earth.

There's no training to prepare your body for its loss of balance, You get nausea and all sorts f tihngs. your skeleton also stretches (I was five or six centimeters taller than on Earth), and so muscles keep their strength but they are of a diffrent length. your body's equilibrium shifts, and when you come back to Earth the muscles start contracting again , but they cannot find the equilibrium point so easily. I remeber shaking constantly. Also I could be sitting and feel totally tired. Coming back to Earth is definetely the hardest aspect of being in space- for me, anyways!

On the station, you are isolated and confined, with only a few other people to talk to. You can't go out in the evening and see people, For some reason I discovered that whatever I was doing I was seeing pizzas all over the place, such as in clouds when looking at Eartg. Freud would probably have a lot to say about that! I thought the food on the station was decent but far away from what an Italian would say is deliciuos. It was very good from a nutritional point of view, but a little horrific for an Italian. maybe i was craving pizza beacase of food like that, or maybe I was just associating pizza with going out with friends and having a beer, maybe that is what i was missiong. you are in isolation up there, and there are a lot of things you can't do, a lot of things which ae't normal.

Sometimes you forget that you're in space. It takes about a month and a half before you get out of your 'Earth habits', getting used to space, doing things in a different way. For example, we had a table in one of the nodes for eating in the evening. the table had been there for years. It was horizonatl in respect to the flor of teh deck, because that's how a table is on Eartg. It was protruding a lot, and you'd often hit it when going past. One dau i was looking at it and I thought,'There must be a way to do tis better. Why is tis table paralle to the deck, when there is no gravity?' You use Velcro to stick things to the table anyway so that they don't float away, so why not have it at an angle, like  atechnical drawingtable? I kind of tilted it a up a little bit, then more, and more, until finally , if you look at it now, it's tilted at a steep angle because you don;t need a horizntal table and it's much more out of the way. It was there for ten years before somebody thought to move it!

I would say that its an environment that is closed, isolated and confined. At first, when I was told I would spend six months on the station begore the mission, i though,'Oh my God, six months, are you out f your mind?' looking back I realized that I did not have the time to do everything I wanted, like taking more pictures, looking at Earth, playing around more, calling people, doing video clips. You end up doing things up there that make sense, time flies and everything is nice, but  you wish you could have done more.

HIW: What was yor favorite aspect of living in space?

PN: I loved taking pictures, looking at the Earth and [re]discovering it. It was very enjoyable. You just go to the window and there you have it- a great and gorgeous view. however, when you go to the window randomly, more often than not you're just going to see an ocean with clouds.It's niceand blue, but that's abbout it. Sometime you see a piece of land going by and it's not so recognizable. It's not easy to figure out what's what, excpet Italy! When you start talking about the UK and ireland it gets complicated because of the angle, cloud coverage, time of day and sun reflection, etc. In the beginning you try to figure out where you are without using the software that tells us, but little by little you start to know what's going on. By the second/ third/fi=ourth months you look out the window and you know where you are- the continent, infomration, features that are there that you might want to take pictures of, or if it's boring you might spend a few minutes on something else.

I started using more and more powerful lenses to capture some interesting detaiks that I could see from up there. First  I tried to see the Egyptian pyraminds, the Great Wall of China, and other landmarks. I wanted to see uf an aircraft carrier at sea, some volcanoes, special islands, and then I started looking around randomly, taking pictures of things that were astonsihing and different. I had this feeling that I was a scientist peering down a microscope that allowed me to take pictures of this samll sphere rotating below, discovering microscopic things. I'd look at the pictures and realize that those things were 20 kilometers [12.4 miles] in doamter. you can't really see things that are any smaller than that.

I became really interest in taking photos of landmarks and countries. i started using social media like Twitter and Flickr beacuase i thought those things were interesting. I decided to start tweeting them to see wheta people thought. That turned out to be a pretty good source of enjyment: finding something special and tweeting it to people, asking them for quizzes or riddles from space and seeing all the commnets. it turned out to be a very enjoyable way to spend time, letting everybody participate in this adventure.

Paolo Nespoli and Russian cosmonaut Dmitri Kondratyev take pictures of the Earth in the Cupola module on the ISS.

HIW: Were you asked to the pictures by NASA or the ESA?

PN: I wasn't asked to do it by NASA or the ESA. SOme of teh other astronauts had done it beforeme. I was not the first. Several of them told me that it was enjoyable. I did not tweet before I went into space because I don't have much time to do it. I see some people go around with phone all day, typing what they are doing, clicking, clicking, clicking, but I have so many things to do. however, in space it worked out pretty well. Sometimes when I was taking pictures I was asking for help from ESA to identify what I was looking at. other times I would guess but sometimes I would make a mistake, and people would correct me, so I learned a that it was better to verify what what I was seeing before hald of the world thinks,'What is that stupid astronaut doing up there?!' One of teh first weeks I was up I tweeted a picture of Europena city and really thought it was London... Turns Oout it was Paris. How can you make a mistake between London and Paris? It was beyond me. But in space, you travel so fast that you can pass by so quickly, and you only have a few seconds to snap a picture. You have no time to research, so mistakes do happen.

HIW: Did it feeYou do not l like you were travelling at 17000 mph?

PN: Well it depends. If you are above an ocean, for example, which happened often, it doesn't look lik eyou are going fast. But if you want to take a picture of something specific, then you understand how precise you need to be. I'm always on space time now. When I am home in the evening, and I look outside and see a sunset or moon. I see a nice picture and think,'I am going to get my cmera and I'll take a picture in 30 minute'. in space, if you see the moon and you like it, you better take that picture in the next ten seconds because [otherwise] it's gone. A good sunset is 10 secondds and you think,'Oh that's a nice sunset, I'll just get my camera... Holy cow, I need a picture now, where's that camera! If you take out the card or wrong lens, then it's gone.[This is how I manily perceived speed on the ISS.]

you don't feel anything physically on the ISS or the Soyuz capsule though. I remeber when we detached form the space statio on Soyuz coming back to earth, there is a moment in which the engines firesand you slow down and you go into the atmosphere, and this capsules breaks up into three pieces. You are in the middle, the only one that gets to Earth; the others burn up in the atmosphere. At that point you are tumbling, finishing with a bramking burn. The capsule has separated and you are waiting to be captured by the atmsosphere.Then you look outside and realize that you are tumbling. It's not a nice feeling. Are we supposed to be tumbling, you think.IF you don't look outside you don't fel i, even at Mach 25.

 Getting that perfect picture on the ISS can be difficult, says Paolo. 

HIW: What were your main roles on the ISS?

PN: I was one of the flight engineers for the space station. We do a lot of things up there. The main purpose is to take advantage of teh micro-gravity environment and the position of the iSS for all sorts of experiments.  Most of them you can not do on ground beacuse of gravity. I would say that 30-40 percent of the time was spent carrying out scintific experiments in many fields. i did some in life sciences- for example, how my brain adapts to the micro gravity enviromenet, and sorts of tests pn computers and other stuff. The reason for my work on brain was because wwhen you go into spcae you enter into a new environementand teh brain has to adapt to the new situation. It's very similar to some one on Earth who has an accident and loses part or the brain or a limb and needs to re-learn how to do all these things.

In space suddenly there is no gravity, and you can't just walk, you have to push yourself, you have to do things in a new way. You have to invent a way to do it by looking at how the brain adapts. Doing this enables the scientists to figure out(techniquesand therapies) that can be useful on the ground. For example, I was a guniea pig for osteoporosis. They gave me a special diet for a weeks, one week at a time. They were changing my diet, from having lots of proteins and other ones , lots of vegetable proteins, and another one I tried was having a lots of potassium, which is thought to interfere with the osteooporosis mechanism. they do all of these things, they look at you and check your body parameters, figuring out if there are any relatively simple solutions, like does food affect giw people lose bone mass?

About 50 percent of my time was spent maintaining the station. It's amazing how work intensive it is to maintain a laboratory like this. You have supplu ships arriving every month. Its like you lived in your house and never left, but ibce a nibth a truck woudl come to your front door and dock there. Everything that you'd need for that month would be on that truck. the air you breathe, the water you drink, all the supplies, all the equipment. all the spare parts, pieces of tubes for plumbing, electricity, a new TV, new computer, new telephone. I really mean everything. And then you have to take everything from this truckand puti it somewhere you can find it again. You can not just pile it up in space, beacuse it floats away. After it's unpacked, you take all your waste, everything you do not need and shove it in the supply vehicleso that it gets thrown out and burns up on teh atmosphere. that's a lot of workApart form the supply ship, you need to cook, clean filters, and put together facilities so that  you can carry out experiments. A lot of things go into the basic running of the space station.

The last ten percent or so of my time was for physical fitnessand educational or PR activities, such as talking to schools on the phone.My expedition actually hd the record for schools contacts-77- which meant thousands of kidss were talking to us. You do a little vidoe clip for this and that, or you do an interview, let's call it outreach activity. Then, in the eveningthere is about an hour and a half for planned pre sleep activities, then you have eight hours of sleep, and after that are one and a half hours of post sleep, in pre sleep you take care of yourself, do recreational things, clean up, eat, this kind of thing.In the morning you are supposed to have breakfast, a shower, the usual things. What I woudl usually di would be to compress activities. I would not sleep eight hours, instead I'd sleep about six, which left me with three or four hours free in the evening. Then I could take more pictures, eat, sort out my photos, put them up on Twitter and Flickr, or call some friends. In the spcae station we have a phone, and often write emails.

HIW: Can you call whenever you want?

PN: You can pretty much all when you want. It's a special phone- though looks similar to that you'd find on any desk. It works through a satellite system and since you are rotating pretty fast you tend to losed teh connection qucikly and sometimes there are holes for 10-20 minutes. You can't use the phone continually. In general if I want to call somebody that evening one way or the other I manage to call them. in the eveings I mostly talked to my wife and daughter.

HIW: How do you shave on the ISS?

PN: This is one fo the things you need to leanr to do differently. Obviusly, you cannot always take a shower, as there's bot much water and it goes all over the place. Shaving you need to learn to do things in a whole new way. First I put a bit of water on my face, then take a pea-size amount of shaving cream and just make it stick there on my face. next I take a fresh new razor blade and get shaving. there's no way you can actually clean the razor blade, so you just try to make it work for the whole face, and then throw it away. there's nothing else you can do. Then you use a wet towel to rinse your face, and that's it.

HIW: How do you stay clean on the ISS>

PN: The space station is now in its assembly stage. All the planned modules are up there. For years they camped on the station, but now we have what they call crew quaters. these are telephone booth-z=sized spaces that have your sleeping bag, computer, personal studd on the wall and changes of clothes, etc. You can close teh door and it's pretty private and dark. You turn teh lights off and you're isolated and insulated; you can't hear people outside. For a personal space it's quite convenient. You tryto use it on the ground though and, oh my God, you never think you'll be able to sleep there beacuase it's vertical and narrow. In zero-gravity though it becomes very comfortable. We do have a facility, which technically is called the Waste Hygiene Compartment. It's another telephone booth-sized place that can be closed. Inside there is your toilet, and you can take your clothers off and wash in a bit more comfort. We usually do wash ourselves in a piecemeal fashion here and there or just use a towel. If you wnat to take a shower, you go into this booth. We like to use this Russian towel, which is very thin and impregnated with soapy disinfectanant liquid, and you wrap this towel over your body. It's pretty nice and you feel pretty clean when you do this. For washing your hair we have some rinse-less shampoo; you put three or four teaspoons of water in your hair, wrap it through and then dry up witha towel and then that's it.

We don't  wash clothes up there; you just tend to sort of use teh same clothes over and over. They don't get dirty bevause it's so clean up there. on Earth you go out and you'll get dust or grease all over them, but in space only bits of food might get on them. they don't particularly smell bad until a few months of use. In six months I used only three pairs of trousers and I stated with only four shirts. When they told methat's all I'd get for six months i couldn't belive it, but  it was fine. When you do physical fitness you use a special short to collect sweat. you use it and then hang it to dry somewhere. We use the same short for a month and it's fine.

On the station it's all pretty clean, but sometimes there's a smell and we cannot open a window to get some'fresh air'. Instead, the air is changed by the turnover systems and it's continuosly circulated, filtered and cleaned, the humididty is removed, and some of teh toxic things are removed. It's pretty clean. there were cases that the carbon dioxide equipment was purposefully kept at a low rate, and then you feel a little bit of a space dust, but normally we feel very clean.


