Long before the presidential election of 2016, college and univresity faculty faced serious chakllenges to our profession.  The Reagan Administration launched an era of privatizataion taht decreased public funding of higher education.  Administrators repsonded by embracing an instiktutional vision of an "entrepreneurial" university in ways taht have shifted many universities away from their traditional public missions and towards identities as private market actors.  The corporatization of the university has undermined faculty academic freedom, job security, due process, and shared governance as many administrators have adopted a top-down model of decision-mkaing, created a largely contingent faculty workforce, and commercialized higher education teaching and research.  These changes have created risky conditions for faculty members who pursue controversial issues in their teaching and research or criticize college and university administrators.  Since the Regana era, continued rightward shifts in political and judicial institutions have added external threats to faculty academic freedom, job security, and governance rights.  State legislatures have restricted the scope of collective bargaining in public employment, including through attacks on faculty rights to unionize.  Twenty-eight states now have "right-to-work" laws prohibiting the collection of fair-share fees -- which cover the costs of negotiating wages, benefits, and protections for individuals who are reprsented by, but are not members of a union ---- in pulbic or pivated unionized workplaces.  The threat that the Supreme court would constitutionalize such prohibitions in public employment was only briefly postponed when Justice Antonin Scalia died before the courd could decide the Friedrichs in California Teachers Assoication case of 2016.  In private universities, faculty face ongoing obstacles to unionization as a result of the Surpme Court's 1980 UYeshiva decision, which defines most tenure-track and tenured fauclty members as mangerial employees excldued from coverage under the National Labor RElations Act (NLRA).  Even the Obama administration brought new threates to academic freedom, as the Department of Education and college and university administrators applied overly broad definitions of hostile environment harassment, with the ironic result that Title IX allegations could be made against owmen faculty members based on their teaching and research in gender and sexuality studies.  Given these pre-Trump threats to academic freedom, the changes under the Trump administration in some ways could be described as a continuation of existing trends.  Yet, this is clearly not the case.  Rather, the scope and depth of the attacks launched by the Trump administration represent a qualitatively jjnew threat to social, economic, and political instituions in the United States.  The administration has expanded and deepened the assault on labor and unions through its appointments in all branches of government, including National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) appointments of attorneys from anti-union law firms.  The appointment to the Supreme Court of Neil Gorsuch cjreated a solid cosnervcative fmajority, as evidence dby its decisions in Trump v,. Hawaiij, which upheld the anti-Muslim travel ban, and Janus v. AFASCME, which completed the work left undone in Friedrichs.   The appointment of Brett Kavanaguh mvoes the court even farther to the political right, raising the likelihood that additional decisions will further restrict labaor rights and undrmine enqual protection on the basis of gender and race.  Academic freedom give sfaculty the power to indluence gerations of students by presenting them with a multiplicity of perspective on political, social, economic, and scientific issues.  Faculty research provides students, colleagues, adn the public with data and snalysis to expand knoweldge and understanding of issues acrosst he hujmanities =, natural sciences and social sciences.  Academic freedom protects the public of }extramural speech" of faculty within or outside their disiplinary areas, including disent against he existence of injurstice, inequality and absues of power.  The trump adminsitatiaon and its allies feel threatened by acadmeics who voice dissent against hte administation's dismantling of government programs frokmt he new Deal and the War on Povery; against the administration's attacks on sciencefd; against the administration's xenophobo=ia; and against the administration's racist, misogynistic, and homophobic policies in the United States and abroad.   At this difficult historical moment, AAUP standards of acadmeic freedom are more important than ever.  The 1915 Declarataion of dfPrinciples on Academic Freedom and Academic Tenure broadly defines academic freedom ikn teaching, research, and extramural speech, to be protected through the stonrg job security of tneure.f   These principles are reinforced in the 1940 Statement on Academic Freedom and Tenure, with susequent derivative AAUP policies describing the "inextricable link" between academic freedom and sahred governance.  In the current period of corporatization of higher educaction, college and university administrations ahve sought to wrest power form the faculty by undermining the tenure system, expnaidng the ranks of administrators, and weakening sharead governance.  Despite these structural shifts, faculty have continued to exercise their academic freedom, although they do so in the face of iknternal and extrernal obstacles.  Fadculty in gender and r=critical race studies face vsevere program cuts; climate scientisits in public universiites face overly broad public records requests by climate-denier orgnaizations; scientists, adn engineers face pressure to engage in research that can be commercialiees through aptents and licenses to industry.  The Trump administation's ascendancy, accomplished through a campagin based on racis, seixsm, and xenophobia, ahas cfreated new and heightened external threats to faculty who exercise their cademic freedom in teaching, research, and extramurla speech.  Turther, the weamening of tenure, the dramatic growth of contingent faculty ranks, and the expnaded power of college and university amdinstriations have made the faculty more vulnerable to retaliation for engaging in controversial spedh.  Since the 2016 Presidential election, theres has bene shsarp increase in cirulent targeted online harssment of faculty who criticize soical inequalities and Trump administration policies.  There has also been a pattern of punitive actions by collerges and universities against faculty for their extramural speech that deals with racial inequalies ,particularly where the speech uess t=satire or irony to draw attention to system racism.  Through its campagin agains ttareted harsment the AAUP  has defended faculty from such efforts to silence dissent and chill academic freedom.  

So then, when you start thinking about the possibiliteies and the uses of memory and the abuses of the ways people can forget, and you will NEVER fforgggettting and that is the lesson of Grossman and hispoety and his life.  The bitter logic of an ending that lives on through others, and he somehow knew I waould be that peroson who remembered such things, adn that is special.  I shoujdl read Clarie Jarvis thinking through that in her book, but she did also ifnd it interesting that I focused on things that others didn't do and that is hepful.  I ahe bene able to use muy skills in some eunexpected ways and that is really interesting, at least.  I want to do interesting work.  I suspect that is why some agree to do stuff in space and that takes a tool o flife on earth.  And suddenly ny it dawns on me on the craziness of agreeing to do such 

Attack on Labor Movement

Attacks on Social MOvmenetns for Equality

The third prong of attacks sthat directly affect higher education is the Trump administration's hostility towards social movements for el=quality.  From the start of his presidnetial campaign and through hsi presidncy, Trump has displayed a broad and deep level fo animus towards Muslims, Latinos, immigrants, women and people of color.  The administration's policies refeld=ct this animus, beignijngn almost immeediatley after Trump's inauguration witht he executive order dimposing a broad 


The academic profession gained rights to academic freedomm, tenure, and shared govenrance through collective action.  The AAUP was founded in 1915t as a collective demand for hte job security of tenure at a time when wealthy insustrilistaswe ere pressuring administrators to dismiss faculty engaged in research and extramural speech related to social reform.  While this early orgnaiazing by faculty did not take the form o funionization, it fulfilled the same function by making collective dmeands for favorable working conditions.   In the 104 years since the AAUp's founding =, collective action through shread governance a=has been esential to the protections of individula faculty rights of academic freedom, tenure, and due process.  Sinc ethe 1960's faculty ahave expanded their colldctcvife actiofn to includd unionaa=zation and collective bargaining, pari=ticularly in public univeristies covered by state collective bargainini g laws for paublic employees.  With formal collective bargaining in universities, the academic profession has become part of the broader, labor movement. jjjjjjjThis is the weirdesitting the first expllanet of the nasas space stiation in Baltimore Maryland so for my to do list, I increasingly need to focus on the HTML and CSS for the course so that the students can see the difference between betwere and layout of an HTML document and that the CSS will be ultimately styling of the text, so they have to learn the seldector elemenets that will declare the properites or values that are sassigned to go witkh the the selected item.  fromt here teh students have to learn o=how to roder that teext skkdkkdkkkekkdk not to me make yuou self-conscious about the wonder of science and the Mars space probe lkhad aultimately been floored out on Mars and they discovered that the surface ujltimately was ice, so when that happens science is like a done deal, right.  If Sara Silverman did a routine of this moment along with LAl Franken, I suspect that they would make a crack about something connected to the exxtra terrestrial components of the typing task and how ti involves some earther as super graviety experience of sun rays that book from the green planet, ahwatever is lef to fit .  And then they maybe discofvered tdhat the bottom feelll out of the world, so that teveryone wanted a kitkat and nothing was left.   But increasingly today, I wonder about the issues with young friends I ma learning are dying of cnacner becuase tha tjust doesn't seem right.  I had learned that HUmira cna ckill you.  I didn't know that before.  But regrdless, I think of how Sharon Marcus may be coping amid that loss.  It's hard enough to know that for years this was coming, but how did it HIT her when it in fac thappened, is a differnt question entirely.  So when I was thinking of Wesy Roxbury as a place to die and why that turned out to bethe clocation.f  I really wonder why.  Did they pick there.  or What was the deal.  I do knwo that Grossman died when he was at I bleieve Arlington, amybe Brighton.   I should look that up.  At any rate, I am hopeful that Kendi is cancer free at this point but it sounded very serious, like a very rare cancer had infilitrated his liver, which just doesn't sound good AT ALL.  As I stand here with this weight on my chest wondering about how space works, I think fof them as part of the stars, because grossman used to Alright, I jsut put out that alaarm.  What was I saying before.  fOK. I was thinking about the interview that Sharon Marcus had done on seiality, as it tied to Lev Grossman, AO Scott and the person whod oes the serial Podcast.  One fo their points seemed to be that these things really shift with time and olt experience that someone could haver f

The new ultra conservativejAlright, so here we go again, for the second round of space cadet adventuref.  jAt this phase, I was thinking about the ways that this experiment could benefit y all go to med school here, whihc nobody would imagine that the space program was in this side builidng near Rutland Avenue where you coujld actually go and speak to someone about ways to train peopel to adapt tos pace physically and mentally and much else.  So there si this courageous person now teaching the topics that twnty years ago I could not imagine a way forward, adn then somehow it happened.   which is just incredible, but Rana is the persect person tod o this job ajI imagine she is terrific at enabling someone to ssee what the issues likely area and it helps that she has a law degree because now we learn instittutions don't really support the develofpment of ways to elp those who struglge and that higher education was a way to enable only af ew to aces sit but as you make the turn to being on faculty nobody helps you make that adjusmtent and that is disappointed and that reallyu can and does challenge you in a veariety of ways.  This in ot the s=first time I ahve been trainding to be an astronaut.  The last time I was a Rover mechanism on a random planet and then worked with two other space cadets to figure out ways to find merials on a polanet that was fa rfrofmf ehre, and that also helped me figure dout that itw as possible to find gold nowhere, adn so Frost's poem that nothing gold can stay turns out tot be truee, and hwou woujld have thought,.  Tomorrow, when we do the JHU KNowledge Map it will be interesting to learn what literary texts are at stake and how that ties tinot ways to value what is happening in those tesxt and the differnet schools ystems tohat help you figure out what they are assinging across the country, so you get a heat map of the ways everyone in Salem, MA is reading Shakespeare or not and that would be on board with the ways the French mMinistry of Education figures this out at the schools in that district, and who would f Okay, that was a wierd disruption becasue when I oopened the tablet it came up with the whole Smollet affiar and that is just disappointing and sad.  Ther ehas to be a better way tod jmove foward.  How did Nyasha afllude to it, said wi tw as a case of wetiko.  So that is not good.  As i leanred that hampshire dcollege would be closing, I just thought what luck for Globrize because now she has to close the university and it just seemed the luck and now I think Tara could be part of hwere I am from and she didn't realize it.  There is a pain or recongition iknt erms of what heppneed with that s=skkjShe didn't get photo right son this todo and nothing was asked of me to get permissions and technically I would own the copy right was that your door someone knocikg the door daclarms and valcves and then jsut started to take up the other ways that the astronaught would have to be aware of a knowck at the door and if this was really oouuter space that would be totally weird adn not right but now as I stand here and continue to type and wonder what I willl do tongiht I tam thinking of a film that would help me focus fon the isseu and while I do have Crazy Rich Asianas waiting for me as the iflm of the hour I htink afte rthis event I shoudl seit and rest and not worry much more about things.   Evnen as you nbeign to feel anuseius ayou can't leave space, and I wonder how they mange.  I would vote for Mark Kelly jkin ARizona beause I think eha sh endured so much adn would be an outstanding senator.  I think he would have so mcuht o say and then also its' cool htat he ahs a twin ofs astronaut and then this sis something clear that she is in charge of he study so how do you use this for research and how does this tieminto someone's dissertatio  and wehre do things fo rform here.  I want to start typing Bedder response and songs and there is noone here to sty, nobone here, to satay, noone here, snone one miles ,,,,kdjmkdkkdkdditto bam bam bam boom, and I think I would take their songs Bang on and wlak it off athere 's your masoc tin my mouth, let's go work it out, ah Mercury IO'v ebeen waiting for the lessons of life, dittod ditoo and then Kim Deal does thiis amazing riff and I saw them at the Black Cat and would do that again for a seocnd and who knwos what else I would do this she can't find her way out of the building and I couldn't find my waher ewhich is at elling thing about this experiment, where is it goen adn how far jcan we go and when does it end and how mcuh longer will any of this take and increasingly I cam getting used to the key board which now kind of uspets, but yeah, I waonder what the IRB looks like on this exepriemnt and what would happen enxt, does this lead to the s trange researhc of Marsh and then Venus and tehn ultimately, I think I just even forgot my planets, which is understandlabe when you know Plato now is no longer a planet and I'm tired of bad news about what we thought we knew about space, but tha tis really a rpboelm these days.  At any rate, I'm not sure ho much logner tubt my wathc shyask thirty miknutes or so adn I wondder if I'm standing here on out or how that will ultiamtely work or what.  I can use a water break and that is somethin gthat makes me wish this were over sooner thna righ now I think it can or will be.   So as I wait insturctions from earth, what will hapejns nextf. and who cares is the rael eustions nad as ik ep wondeirng about hta twhole angle on things, I thiknk tomrorow night the lgin Conerto will be a nice brek aakdkkdkdandm  that is not erribly suprising because what lese can youd o reallya but wait for theiknevitanlr, as welll adie and why owould ANYONE fvolutneer to do this is still another question I can't really answer right now and as I breathe and tyr to find my footing, iw ash I could get another alarm jsut ochagne the routines, it would help with dfocus and socumuch else and this is reaslly why I think typing in space is a fun thing to do and I woujld fhigly recomemndd for anyone who is trying to sort out their thinking on very difficult life afnnihilation qeustions, because when you're gone, you're gone, nobody is here to stay, adn when I think of epopell volunterering to do this for HUMANITY that si crazy, it si a huge committeement and responsibility and how do their families put up with this task is the other  Trump appointees to the NLRB will seek to roll back this progress as soo   Private colleges and universiteis have for decades sought to undremine the ability of faculty to unionize under the NLRA =.  In 1980, o=coinciding with teh start of hte Reegan era, theU  Supreme Court held in NRLB vw. Yeshiva University that fauclty collective autonomy through shared goverannce made s=msot tenure-track and tenured faculty at private universitites "managerial" employees exl=cluded from rights to u nionis-=ze unter the NLRA>  More recnetly, under the Obama administration, the NLRB made important progress by interpreting Yeshiva in the context of corporitization trends taht have weakened fauclty power in universities.  In 2014, in Pacific Luteheran University has completely blown my options.  So today the JHU univesrity ahs likely moved along to expecting a private police force to take over teh campus and the majroty of students are  not for this change, which is kind of interesting,a dn then here I am typing awway and feeling a little whoosie but mostly fine, adn I am now trying to think of what I will need to do in order to feel right again and how it is that this guy ultimately has decided tod pick a place where he can likely use MATLA and calcualte the key strongesks and maybe they don't have much meaning, but then theyw ill keep on doing it, right, I don't know why.  That is the nature of scientifica inquiry and research.  And then if you think of how they just didn't know wnything cnetureies ago about anything of this being possible and yet they somehow managed to lmove right lalong and do their experimetns and suddenly you feel tremendous respect for those who manage to be int ehse situationms.   I would like to make a to do list but it would be depressing. I wsuspect I have a kbillion things to grrade and then there;s no time for perp and that makes hyou knot want to do anyting and that is it.   but nobody helps you do basic things with that stuff and it's important to understna dthat is ture, but if I did an experiment that brought me to earth and felt whoozie and now understand eveyrone leaves the planet in this way, tehn the existenial crisis that can reslult makes you wonde rwhat could be next with thsis project.  I'm not sure or entirely cldar why anyone would do it and that is theprobem.  she turned it inot a total stupid issue sand i tt make sme think hwo Tara will be and if she will be okay or what but now I feel more nauseous thna before and it's hitting me on earth and maybe they can't pay you enough toa gree to do this and that is the point.  It's grueling and hard and I want to go to bed and when I get home I will thinka bout it.  There is a whole matter fof not entirley knowing if that is going to keep me focused on what in fact needs to happen and then I wonder how many people volunteer and know how to type as welll.  That is no longer a skill you find quite as frequently and then dyou end ffup not in fact writing a book but then maybe ydour life story doens't quite end up as you might ahve ee=xpecte d it to run out of time and then Powe did die just block from here, and eveyrhting swirls and churns and Ellis Avery you are of the When I started to think of the ways Voyage to the Bottom of the Earth was written by Jeles Verne and then the submartine is in fact made in the Inner Harbor of Baltimore, you realize that you don't have to go to aspce to reallize that 