Italian Paolo Nespoli, 54, has spent 174 days in space across two missions,travelling into Earth orbit on both NASA's Space Chuttle and the Russian Soyuz spacecraft. We asked what it's like to live in space, how it felt to witness the Space Shuttle docked to the ISS and more inour exclcusive interview. 

How it works: Why did you decide to become an astronaut?

Paolo Nespoli: Ever since I was a little boy I wanted to become an astronaut. I was inspired by the Apollo missions, though not really Apollo 11. I was more interested in the later missions where they drove the rovers on the moon. I thought it was fascinating, with the astronauts jumping and driving around on the surface. Life was kind of different after that. I was drafted into the Italian army (they still had the draft back then) then figured out that I could make it as an astronaut. I applied twice to the European Space Agency (ESA) and didn't make it, but on the third selection I made the cut. 

HIW: Your first mission to space was on board STS-120. What was it like going to space for the first time?

PN: I was selected fairly young and got to fly after just nine years of training, which is somewhat of a short time to wait compared to many. People asked if I was scared but I wasn't really. I'd trained so much, I knew what to expect. Feeling the acceleration in the Space Shuttle was amazing. The first couple of minutes it really shakes you. However, I was scared in space, because we'd trained for years and we only had 15 days to complete our mission. All I kept thinking to myself was, 'You better not mess this up. People have been working on this for years!' The fear of failure was the scariest thing about going into space. 

HIW: What was the hardest part of going to space?

PN: I didn't mind it so much in space, but my body felt really old when I came back to Earth; the gravity was so intense. I was fine in space, but I'm not exceptional or a superhero. Of the seven Shuttle crew members and three on the Soyuz I was the worst coming back by far. The micro-gravity environment does a lot to your body. You lose a lot of calcium in space; your bones and muscles can get quite weak.

HIW: How did you ensure your body stayed in shape? How did you adapt to life in space?

PN: We'd do about two hours of physical fitness every day. I would say you come back in better shape [in terms of fitness]. Doing two hours of exercisde every day for six months, I came back with more muscles and less fat than when I left.
We did about one hour of cardiovascular exercise on a treadmill and another hour of resistance exercise. Obviously, you can't lift weights in space, so a machine simulates the strain of lifting as on Earth.

There's no training to prepare your body for its loss of balance. You get nausea and all sorts of things. Your skeleton also stretches (I was five or sixe centemeters taller than on Earth), and so muscles keep their strength but they are of a different length. Your body's equilibrium shifts, and when you come back to Earth the muscles start contracting again,but they cannot find the equilibrium point so easily. I remember shaking constantly. Also I could be sitting and feel totally tired. Coming back to Earth is definitely the hardest aspect of being in space --for me, anyway!

On the station, you are isolated and confined, with only a few other people to talk to. You can't just go out in the evening and see people. For some reason I discovered that whatever I was doing I was seeing pizzas all over the place, such as in clouds when looking at Earth. Freud sould probably have a lot to say about that! I thought the food on the station was decent but far away from what an Italian would say is delicious. It was very good from a nutritional point of view, but a little horrific for an Italian. Maybe I was craving pizza because of food like that, or maybe I was just associating pizza with going out with friends and having a beer, maybe that is what I was missing. You are in isolation up there, and there are a lot of things you can't do, a lot of things which aren't normal.

Sometimes you forget that you're in space. It takes about a month and a half before you get out of your 'Earth habits', getting used to space, doing things in a different way. For example, we had a table in one of the nodes for eating in the evening. That table had been there for years. It was horizontal in respect to the floor of the deck, because that's how a table is on Earth. It was protruding a lot, and you'd often hit it when going past. Onde day I was looking at it and I thought, 'There must be a way to do this better. Why is this table parallel to the deck, when there's no gravity?' You use Velcro to stick things to the table anyway so that they don't float away, so why not have it at an angle, like a technical drawing table? I kind of tilted it up a little bit, then more, and more, until finally, if you look at it now, it's tilted at a steep angle because you don't need a horizontal table and it's much more out of the way. It was there for ten years before somebody thought to move it!

I would say that it is an environment that is closed, isolated and confined. At first, when I was told I would spend six months on the station before the mission, I thought, 'Oh my God, six months, are you out of your mind?' Looking back I realized that I did not have the time to do everything I wanted, like taking more pictures, looking at Earth, playing around more, calling people, doing video clips. You end up doing things up there that make sense, time flies and everything is nice, but you wish you could have done more.

HIW: What was your favorite aspect of living in space?

PN: I loved taking pictures, looking at the Earth and [re]discovering it. It was very enjoyable. You just go to the window and there you have it - a great and gorgeous view. However, when you go to the window randomly, more often than not you're just going to see an ocean with clouds. It's nice and blue, but that's about it. Sometimes you see a piece of land going by and it's not so recognizeable. It's not easy to figure out what's what, except Italy! when you start talking about the UK and Ireland it gets complicated because of the angle, cloud coverage, time of day and sun reflection, etc. In the beginning you try to figure out where you are without using the software that tells us, but little by little you start to know what's going on. By the second/third/fourth months you look out the window and you know where you are - the continent, information, features that are there that you might want to take pictures of, or if it's boring you might spend a few minutes on somehting else.

I started using more and more powerful lenses to capture some interesting details that I could se from up there. First I tried to see the Egyptian pyramids, the Great Wall of China, and other landmarks. I wanted to see an aircraft carrier at sea, some volcanoes, special islands, and then I started looking around randomly, taking pictures of things that were astonishing and different. I had this feeling that I was a scientist peering down a microscope that allowed me to take pictures of this small sphere rotating below, discovering miscroscopic things. I'd look at the pictures and realize that those things were 20 kilometers [12.4 miles] in diameter. You can't really see things that are any smaller than that. 

I became really interested in takign photos of landmarks and countries. I started using social media like Twitter and Flickr because those things were interesting. I decided to start tweeting them to see what people thought. That turned out to be a pretty good source of enjoyment: finding something special and tweeting it to people, asking them for quizzes or riddles from space and seeing all the comments. It turned out to be a very enjoyable way to spend time, letting everybody participate in this adventure. 

HIW: Were you asked to take the pictures by NASA or the ESA? 

PN: I wasnt' asked to do it by NASA or the ESA. Some of the other astronauts had done it before me. I was not the first. Several of them told me that it was enjoyable. I did not tweet before I went into space because I don't have much time to do it. I see some people go around with phones all day, typing what they are doing, clicking, clicking, clicking, but I have so many things to do. However, in space it worked out pretty well. Sometimes when I was taking pictures I was asking for help from ESA to identify what I was looking at. Other times I would guess but sometimes I would make a mistake, and people would correct me, so I learned that it was better to verify what I was seeing before half of the world things, 'What is that stupid astronaut doing up there?!' One of the first weeks I was up I tweeted a picture of a European city and really thought it was London... Turns out it was Paris. How can you make a mistake between London and Paris? It was beyond me. But in space, you travel so fast that you pass by so quickly, and ou only have a few seconds to snap a picture. You have no time to research, so mistakes do happen. 

HIW: Did if feel like you were travelling at 17,000mph?

PN: Well, it depends. If you are above an ocean for example, which happened often, it doesn't look like you are going very fast. But if you want to take a picture of something specific, then you understand how precise you need to be. I'm always on space time now. When I'm at home in the evening, and I look outside and see a sunset or moon. I see a nice picture and think, 'Okay, I'm going to get my camera and I'll take a picture in 30 minutes'. In space if you see the moon and you like it, you better take that picture in the next ten seconds because [otherwise] it's gone. A good sunset is eight seconds and you think, 'Oh, that's a nice sunset, I'll just get my camera...Holy cow, I need a picture now, where's that camera!' If you take out the card or wrong lense, then it's gone. [This is how I mainly perceived speed on the ISS.]

You don't feel anything physically on the ISS or the Soyuz capsul though. I remember when we detached from the station on Soyuz coming backt to Earth, there is a moment in which the engine fires and you slow down and go to into the atmosphere, and the capsul breaks up into three pieces. You are in the middle, athe only one that get's to Earth' the others burn up in the atmosphere. At that point you are tumbling, finishing with a braking burn. The capsul has separated and you are waiting to be captured by the atmosphere. Then you look outside and realize you're tumbling. It's not a nice feeling. ARe we supposed to be tumblign, you think. If you don't look outside you dont' feel it, even at Mach 25. 

HiW: What were your main roles on the ISS?

PN: I was one of the flight engineers for the space station. We do a lot of things up there. The main purpose is to take advantage of the micro-gravity environment and the position of the ISS for all sorts of experiments. Most of them you cannot do on ground because of the presence of gravity. i would say that 30 - 49 percent of the time was passed carrying out scientific experiements in many fields. I did some in life science -for example, howm my brain adapts to the micro-gravity environment, and all sorts of tests on computers and other stuff. The reaosn for the work on my brain was because when you go into space you actually enfter a new environment and the brin hhas to adapt to the new situation. It's very similar to someone on Earth hwho has an accident and loses a part of the brain or a limb and needs to re-learn to do all these things.

In space suddenly there's no more gravity, and you can't just walk, you have to push yoursle, you have to do things in a new way. You have to invent a way to do it by looking at how the brain adapts. Dong this enables scientists fo figure out [techniques and therapeis] that can be useful on the ground. For example, I was a ginuea pig for osteoporosis. They gave me a special diet for weeks, one at a time. They were s=chaging my diet, from having lots of proteins and the other ones,, lots of vegetable proteins, and  another one I tried was having lots of potassium, which is thought to interfeere with the osteoporosis mechanisms. they do all these things, they look at you and chekch your body parameters, figureing out if there are any relatively simple solutions, like does food affect how peoplelose bone mass?

aboug 50 percent of my time was spent maintating the station. It's amazing how work intensive t is to maintain a laboratory like this. you have supploy ships arriving every onth. It's like you lived in your house and never left, but once a month a truck would come to your front door anddock there. Everything youd' need for that month would be in that truck. The air you breathe, the water you drink, all the suppliees, all the equipment, all the spare parts, pieces of tubes for plumbing electricity, a new TV, new computer, new telephone; i really mean everything. And then you have to take everything from thsi truck and put somewhere you can find it again. You cannot pile it up in space, because it floats away. AFter it's unpacked you take all your waste, everyting you don't need, and shove it in the supply vehicle so that it gets thrown out and burns up in the atmosphere . Tha's a lot of work. A[part from the supply ship you need to cook, clean filters and put together facilities so that you can carry out experiments. A lot of things go into the basic running of the space station. 

The last ten percent or so of my time was for physical fitness and educational PR activities, such as talkiing to schools on the phone. My expedition actually had the record for schools contact - 77 - which meant thousands of kids were talking to us. You do a little video clip for this and that, or you do an interview; let's call it outreach activity. Then, in the evening, there is about an hour and a half for planned pre-sleep activities, then you have eight hours of sleep, and after that are one-and-a-half hours of post-sleep. In pre-sleep you take care of yourself, do recreational things, clean up, eat, this kind of thing. In the moorning you're supposed to have breakfast, a shower, the usual things. What I would usually do would be to compress activities. I would not sleep eight hours, instead I'd sleep about six, wich left me with three or four hours free in the evening. Then I could take more pictures, eat, sort out my photos, put them up on Twitter and Flickr, or call some friends. On the space station we have a phone, and often write emails.

HIW: Can you call whenever you want? 

PN: You can pretty much call when you want. It's a special phone - though looks similar to that you'd find on any desk. It works thorough a satelite system and since you are rotating pretty fast you tend to lose the connection quickly and sometimes ther are hols for 10 - 20 minutes. You can't use the phone continuoually. In general if I want to call somebody that evening one way or the other I manage to call them. In the evenings I mostly talked to my wife and daughter. 

HIW: How do you stay clean on the ISS?

PN: This is one of the things you need to learn to do differently. Oviously you cannnot always take a shower, as there's not much water it goes all of=ver the place. Shaving you need to learn to do things in a whole new way. First I put a bit of water on my face, then take a pea-size amount of shaving cream and just make it stik there on my  face. Nesxt I take a fresh new razor blade and get shaving. There's no way you can actually clean the razor blade, so you just try to make it work for the whole face, and then throw it away. There's nothing else you can do. Then you can use a wet towel to rinse your face, and that's it. 




They don't particularly small bad until a few months of use. In six months I used only three pairs of trousers and I started with only four shirts. When they told me that's all I' get for six mopnths I couldn't brlieve it bu it was fine. When you do physical fitness you use a special shirt to collect sweat. You use it and then hang it to dry somwhere. We use this same shirt for a month and tit's fine.

On the station it's all pretty clean, but sometimes there's a smell and we cannot open a window to get some 'fresh air'. Instad, the air is changed by the turnover systems, and its continuously








We don't wash clothes up there; you just tend to sort of use the same clothes over and over. They don't get dirty because its tso clean up there. On Earth you go out and you'll get dust or grease all of=ver them, but in space only bits of food might gt on them.T











some risks and there had been discussion forever between NASA and the Russians about this because they were supposed to do it on the previous Shuttle mission but it was voted down, the Russians didn't let them because of the risks.






continuously circulated, filtered, cleaned the humidity is removed, and some of the toxic things are removed. It's pretty clean. There were cases that the carbon dioxide equipment was purposefully kept at a low rate, and then you feel a little bit of space dust, but normally we feel very clean.

HIW: What was it like being the only person in history to see the space Shuttle attached to the ISS?

PN: Well you know, I never thought 'Wow, I'm the only person to see this with my own eyes. I'm the one taking pictures that will be in the history books' If I thought all this I would get scared, so I didn't. The maneuver to take the pictures was not an easy one. It ihad 










was funny because when we landed the camera was left in the module to burn up in the atmosphere. We only brought back the memory cards. When we landed the Russians requeted to me to surrender the memory cards to the commander of the Russian spacecraft, and he was instructed to leave them in the capsule. I didn't understand why the did thisi, because I wanted to see them immediate.ly, but by doing this they were closed up in the capsule which was being transported from Kazakhistan so Moskow. It took some time to get them; there's a big committee that sits down in Moscow and opens the hatch and pulls out things. In the past things have disappeared and broken, so a big committee pulls out everything and classifies everything that's supposed to be there, things astronauts brought back. They checked, marked, verified and certified everything, but when this was all done, more thatn 15 days after landing I was so scared; I was thinking the reason they are not 










I was really concerned when I unstrapped from my seat and flew over the commander, who was manually piloting. There's not much space in the Soyuz, so everyone was warned I would knock some of the controls and send Soyuz spinning out of the sky. Then we had to open the hatch, i= which was already sealed - also something that is usually a big 'no'. If you have closed and sealed if you don't want to go and break the seat, but we had to. Eventually I'm up there, I'm looking outside and seeing this magnificent view, and it was astonishing. i found myself staring at it for almost 15 seconds, and then I had to snap myself out if it. "You are here to take pictures" I thought. 'You better take some or you will really become famous!' I grabbed the camera and starting snapping pictures, trying to beATTENTIVE. i THOUGHT THERE was some reflection from the window and I saw some smudges, so I was thinking, "Wow, I hope these are coming out!" In the end I toook about 200 picture s==s a= and several minue=tes of video.  



HIW: Willyou, or would you like to go into space again? 

PN: Well, if I had a choice, I would love to go up for another mission. I feel now that I know what's going on up there, so I would love to do things differently, pace myself better, and enjoy things a bit more. The reality is that flight opportunities are scarce -even more so for Europeans - and we have young astronauts  that have never flown, so its's kind of a situation where many things go into the decision process. At this point I would like to go up again and I'm ready if that were to be the case, but not if I have been to space and I have been so lucky to realize a dream I've had since I weas a kid, and I'm very grateful for that.

All imageses curourtesy of NASA/ESA

Transcript.

Title:
Apollo 1 Pre-Launch Test 
Cape Kennedy, Florida,
January 27, 1987

Man's voice (on comm)
- Flight. We have the crew crossing gantry for capsule ingress

2nd man's voice (on comm) 
-roger that

Walter cronkite (voice over)
-inpired by the late President kennedy, in only seven years America has risen to the challenge of what he called the most hazardous and dangerous and greated=st adventure on which man has ever embaked. AFter trailing the Russians for years with our manned space program...

[Cronkite continues over Astronaut]

Astronaut
We got a short.

Astronaut
-fire the spacecraft.

SATURN TEST CONDUCTOR (STC)

(garbled - lost under Cronkite)
-...fire...

Astronaut
Get us outta here!

Walter Cronkite (voice over)
...and after that sudden horrible fire on the launch pad during a routine test that killed American astronauts Fus Grissom, Ed White, and Roger Chaffe, there were serious doubts that we could beat the Russians to the Moon. But tonight a mere eighteen months after the tragedy of Apollo 1, the entire world watch in awe as Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin landing on the Moon

[Here is how the movie departs from the actual mission: The fatal launch pad fire occured on January 27, 1967, and the Apollo 11 moon landing on july 20, 1969. Both dates are displayed correctly onscreen, yet Walter Cronkite's opening narration says only 18 months elapsed betweeen them.]

EXT. HOUSTON SUBURBAN STREET - NIGHT

JIM LOVELL is driving his red Corvette next to him in the front seat sits a box.

[Here is how the movie departs from the actual mission: Jim Lovell's Corvette was actually blue.]

Title: 
July 20, 1968 - Houson, texas

Walter Cronkite (on TV)
-A big good news came just a moment ago. Mission Control gave the spacecraft permission to go to for the extravehicular activity, that is for the walk on the Moon far earlier than anticipated - 9p.m Eastern daylight time...

INT. Lovell Home - living room

An Apollo - 11 moon landing party is going on inside the lovell home.

Jack Swigert
-...and the important thing when you're penetrating the lunar module is your attitude and your relative speed. Now let's say this is me here in the command module and this is you...

Tracy
- all right.

Jack Swigert
-...in the LM. This thinkg sticks out here in front; that's called a probe.

Tracy
-is that true?

Jack siwgert
-absolutely. And, tracy, i'll tell you, when you feel that thing slide in, everytihng's clickin'. its nlike no other feeling in teh world.

the entrance door opens and PETE CONRAD and JIM LOVELL step in, JIM LOVELL is carrying a carton of Champagne under one arm.

[here is how the movie departs from the actual mission: Jim Lovell, Jack Swigert, and fred Haise were all in the MOCR during the Apollo 11 moon landing.]

Pete conrad
-a little liquid propulsion!

Jim lovell
-what's the big ocassion?!

JACK SWIGERT
-Hey, How's it going over there at Mission Control?

JIM LOVELL
-It's a nervous time, they're pacing around, smoking like chimneys, Gene kranz is gonna have puppies (turning to Tracey) Jim Lovell.

TRACEY:
00 hi

JACK SWIGERT
-this is tracey

Jim Lovell
How do you do , Tracey?

Jack swigert
This..This is the man. Gemini 7. Gemini 12. Apollo 8. They...

Jim Lovell
Stop it Swigert

Jack Swigert
...were the first ones aroudn the moon. this guy did 10 laps.

Jim Lovell
with one hand on the wheel. You guys, make yourselves at home. Hey, Marilyn!

Jim Lovell makes his way through the guests and to the kitchen

Marilyn Lovell
-Jim, where have you been?

Jim Lovell
This is the last Champagne in the city of Houston!


Marilyn Lovell
Very good. Good, good

Jim Lovell
-everything else all right?

Marylin Lovell
everything's on cours!

Jim lovell
looks okay...Hey, catdet lovell!

Jay lovell
Hey dad!

jim lovel

put this on ice in the back with the restand make sure it gets cold. you gonna get a haircut this summer?

Jay Lovell
-im on vacation.

Jim lovell
Oooh, get a haircut.

["night train" performed by James Brown plays in the background]

Woman (in background)
Well hello there

INT. Lovell House - Den

Ken Mattingly and FRED Haise are looking at a number of awards and pictures hung on the walls of the den of Apollo-8's mission.

Ken Mattingly
I wouldnt mind being up ther etonight

Fred Haise
God, who wouldn't? Don't worry. Our day's coming. Theyr're not gonna cut the program before number fourteen.

Ken mattingly
you know, my cousin called...

Fred haise
uh-huh.

Ken mattingly
...asked who we'd bribed to get on jim lovell's crew.

Fred Haise
year?

ken mattingly
i jUst told him: "They wanted to make sure he got the best!"

Fred haise
Well they got that right

INT. Lovell House-Living room

The guests begin to gether around the color television in the living room.

John Young
what network do we want?

Everybody
Walter! Come on, put on Walter! Jules Bergman! John. John, turn it up! Turn it up

Walter Cronkite (on TV)
..has completed putting on their spacesuits and the boots, and they're now donning their...

Everybody has turned their attention to the news telecast, except PETE COnRAD who stands up in front of the TV and begins to address the partygoers. 

PETE contrad
Everybody! I... I really appreciate you all coming to this dress rehearsal party for my Apollo 12 landing!

Jim Lovell
sit down conrad!

pete conrat=d
ah, i think we should all take a moment to..to recognized the exemplary..hell..dam near, heroic effort displayed by Neil Armstrong's back up for this historic moon walk, and, of course, his crew...Let's hear it for...let's hear it for Jim lLovell, Ken Mattingly and Fred Haise!

The room fills with cheers and applause.

Marilyn Lovell
-There he is! There he is everybody quiet down!




























